PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

i

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

The Student Handbook is published by the
Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs and Services
Copyright © 2019
Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Telephone No.: (632) 335-1787 or 335-1777 local 209 and 210
Address: Sta. Mesa, Manila, Philippines
Email: vpsas@pup.edu.ph
Layout and cover design: Edrick S. Carrasco
Technical Assistance by University Printing Press
THIS HANDBOOK BELONGS TO:

ii

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

PUP STUDENT

HANDBOOK
2019 REVISED EDITION

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

iii

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

F OR E WOR D

The PUP Student Handbook is a compendium of information on
student concerns and interests.
This work serves as an enduring landmark of the PUP community,
reflecting the external and internal substance of life in the academe.
The Handbook also echoes the sounds and nuances of learning,
including the code of conduct, scholastic standards, cultural and religious
guidelines, and such other policies and directives that lend distinction to
PUP as a fount of knowledge and skills.
Prefaced by the PUP philosophy, vision, and 8-point agenda, the PUP
Student Handbook is a veritable gateway to students’ holistic development.

iv

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

M ESSAG E

M

otivating our students to grow is
like planting seeds of virtues and
knowledge that are reaped at a perfect
time. Patience, hard work, and a special set of
skills are needed in order for these seeds to
germinate and be rightfully sown. Central to this
growth is the guidance that the entire academic
community provides so that fruits of labor are
harvested for the benefit of today’s generation
and of the future.
One of the most important factors that motivate
students is the integrity that is exhibited by a proactive support group which
in this case is composed of the officials, faculty, and administrative staff.
This is why the Polytechnic University of the Philippines worked towards
the creation of this Student Handbook where students’ as well as the
administration’s rights, roles and responsibilities are specified and made
transparent to maintain orderliness and commitment among all members
of the University.
As an outcome of a rigorous committee work based on consultation,
transparency, and respect, this handbook shall guide the processes and be
the basis of decisions concerning the students. And while it may be a ready
reference for academic resolutions, this handbook is an evidence of how
much the University values its students and how much it is willing to provide
just to see them reach their anticipated potential.

					

EMANUEL C. DE GUZMAN, PhD
President

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

v

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

MESSAGE

T

he Office of the Vice President for Student
Affairs and Services is pleased to present
to you the 2019 Revised Edition of the PUP
Student Handbook. This serves as your road map
as you journeyed your way through your college life.
The rigid committee work undertaken to update and
upgrade the Handbook reflects an important change
in the University’s policies, procedures, rules and
regulations. This does not only balance your rights
as students, it also promotes these rights based on
the accepted norms observed and practiced in the
University.

The revision of the handbook was made not only to synchronize its content with
Republic Act No. 10931 or The Universal Access to Quality Tertiary Education Law
that provides free tuition and other fees to state and local universities and colleges.
Likewise, it included provisions that safeguard and protect the welfare of the
students such as those culled from the anti-hazing law and policies and procedures
in the conduct of mandatory random drug testing.
The Handbook also identifies various student services which you can avail as
bonafide students of our Sintang Paaralan. You are encouraged to take advantage of
these services and facilities to enhance your learning and self- development. You are
expected to carefully read and make the most out of this Handbook.
I extend my sincerest acknowledgement to all the members of the Committee and
students who tirelessly shared their knowledge and effort in the revision of the
Student Handbook. For all the efforts of the previous members of the the committee
headed by the former Vice President for Student Affairs and Services, Dr. Herminia
E. Manimtim, my sincerest gratitude.

ZENAIDA R. SARMIENTO, DEM
Vice President for Student Affairs and Services

vi

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

PHILOSOPHY OF PUP
As a State University, the Polytechnic University of the Philippines
believes that education is an instrument for the development of the citizenry
and for the enhancement of nation-building. It believes that the meaningful
growth and transformation of the country are best achieved in an atmosphere
of brotherhood, peace, freedom, justice and a nationalist-oriented education
imbued with the spirit of humanist internationalism.
VISION
Clearing the paths while laying new foundations to transform the
Polytechnic University of the Philippines into an epistemic community.

STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE: 8-POINT AGENDA
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Pursuing academic excellence through disciplinal integrity
Embedding a culture of research
Insuring transparency and participatoriness in giving rewards and
sanctions
Modernizing and upgrading of physical facilities, equipment, library,
and campus development
Reconceptualizing academic freedom
Institutionalizing civil society engagement and involved Extension
Service Program
Assuring transparency in fiscal responsibility
Assessing institutional processes and reviewing critically and rationally
the organization

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

vii

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

viii

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

TA B L E O F CO N T E N T S
FOREWORD
Message of the University President
Message of the Vice President for Student Affairs and Services
Philosophy of PUP
Vision
Strategic Objective: 8-Point Agenda

iv
v
vi
vii
vii
vii

TITLE 1 THE PUP EDUCATION
Background of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Declaration of Principles
Shared Values
Mandate
The Governance of PUP
The PUP Logo
Imno ng PUP

1
1
5
7
7
7
8
9

TITLE 2 STUDENT RIGHTS
Section 1 Fundamental Rights
2 Academic Rights
3 Representation Rights
4 Right to Organize and Right of Association
5 Procedural Rights
6 Other Rights

9
9
10
12
13
13
14

TITLE 3 GENERAL REGULATIONS

15

TITLE 4 CODE OF CONDUCT

16

TITLE 5 ACADEMIC REGULATIONS,
PROCEDURES AND SERVICES
Section 1 Schedule of Fees and Payments
2 Scholarship and Financial Assistance
3 Registration and Cross-Registration
4 Academic Load
5 Changing of Classes, Substitution
and Dropping of Subjects
6 Classification of Students
7 Attendance

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

18
18
19
19
19
20
21
24

ix

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

8 Grading System
9 Late Reporting of Grade/s, Mark/s
and Correction of Entry
10 Completion of Incomplete Mark
11 Integration Period and Examinations
12 Scholastic Standing and Delinquency
13 Completion of Basic Courses in NSTP and P.E.
14 Tenure, Leave of Absence, and Honorable Dismissal
15 Graduation with Honors
16 Graduation Requirements

25
26
26
26
27
28
29
30
31

TITLE 6 STUDENT AFFAIRS AND SERVICES

32

TITLE 7 STUDENT COUNCILS, STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS,
AND STUDENT CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS

41

TITLE 8 CAMPUS PUBLICATIONS

47

TITLE 9 CODE OF DISCIPLINE

50

TITLE 10 DRUG ABUSE POLICY

60

TITLE 11 PROCEDURES FOR THE SETTLEMENT
OF COMPLAINTS/ GRIEVANCES

68

APPENDIX 1 PUP POLICY AND GUIDELINES
FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

74

PUP Board of Regents

78

University Officials

80

Committee on
Student Handbook Revision

81

POSTLUDE

83

x

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

TITLE 1
T HE P U P E D U CAT I O N
Background of the Polytechnic University of the Philippines
History
The Polytechnic University of the Philippines (PUP) started as
the Manila Business School (MBS) on October 1, 1904. It was founded in
response to the demand to train individuals for government and private
service employment. The MBS operated as part of the City School System
under the superintendence of G.A. O’Reilly.
The school’s first offerings included vocational-technical courses
mostly for working students from the provinces. Four years later, the school
became a national school and was renamed the Philippine School of
Commerce (PSC). PSC offered four-year secondary courses in Commerce
in addition to vocational-technical courses like bookkeeping, stenography,
typewriting and telegraphy. In 1917, PSC under the leadership of its Acting
Principal Luis F. Reyes, started to offer night classes to enable the young
people with daytime employment acquire further training. However, due to
the retrenchment policy of the government in 1932, the night school had to
be discontinued, and the PSC operations had to be merged with that of the
Philippine Normal School and the Philippine School of Arts and Trades in
1933.
In 1940, President Manuel L. Quezon, in his graduation address, vowed
to seek appropriations from the National Assembly to build a separate
School of Commerce while Congressman Manuel A. Alazarte and PSC
Superintendent Luis F. Reyes presented a bill to Congress for the said
purpose. These efforts though, were thwarted when World War II broke out.
After the war, PSC continued to offer one- and two-year courses in retailing,
merchandising, and four-year course in distributive arts education while
still merged with PNS, until PSC Superintendent Luis Reyes applied for the
acquisition of its own place to the Philippine Alien Property Administrator
through AMalacañang and the Department of Foreign Affairs. Two old
government buildings at Lepanto and S.H. Loyola Streets in Sampaloc
District of Manila were turned over for the exclusive use of the PSC.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

1

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

The notable performance of its graduates who were hired by both
public offices and the private companies of the post-war era led to the
broadening of course offerings which included undergraduate courses
in commerce and allied fields. In 1952, by virtue of Republic Act 778, PSC
became the Philippine College of Commerce (PCC) with a thrust in business
and commerce. In 1955, PCC received the recognition from the Business
Writers Association of the Philippines as “The Business College of the Year.”
In the years 1956 to 1961, Prof. Pacifico A. Velilla and Atty. Victor Dela Torre
assumed their respective offices as PCC presidents succeeding Pres. Luis
Reyes.
In 1962, Dr. Nemesio E. Prudente took over as PCC President. The
Prudente presidency was another period of further institutional growth
with the offering of more liberal arts and cultural courses; installation
of the Certified Public Accountants Review Class; the introduction of
the scholarship, student assistantship and public relations programs;
codification of the school’s rules and regulations; and the launching of the
Faculty Journal. Faculty promotion was likewise rationalized. School spaces
correspondingly expanded with the assignment of a 10-hectare lot in Taguig
and the Mabini Campus site in Sta. Mesa, Manila for PCC use.
The rise of the nationalist movement in the country especially in
school campuses in the late 1960’s gave more impetus to the realization of
the progressive vision and goals of President Prudente for PCC. Student
participation in the school’s decision-making was made possible with the
appointment of president of the Supreme Student Council as member of the
Board of Trustees. The adoption of RA 6980 in 1968 paved the way to PCC’s
offering of social sciences such as Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts.
Nationalist-oriented student publications, writers’ alliances, cultural groups,
and political mass organizations of faculty and students were encouraged
and supported by the administration in recognition of academic freedom.
PCC’s high-profile involvement in the nationalist movement was used as
justification of the Marcos administration to include Prudente among the
first targets of its crackdown on prominent anti-Marcos figures in 1972 and
throughout the martial law era.
With Narciso Albaracin as Officer-in-Charge in 1972 followed by
Isabelo T. Crisostomo in 1973 and Dr. Pablo S. Mateo in 1977; curricular and
structural changes were implemented. The Faculty of Arts and Sciences
was abolished (it was re-established in 1976) and other faculties were reorganized. The new offerings included courses in technology and technobusiness, Bachelor of Business Administration and General Administration,
and Masters Programs in Public Administration and Economics. Short
courses were strengthened and became degree courses. A branch in the

2

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Bataan Export Processing Zone was established in1975. New facilities were
constructed such as the gymnasium and other sports facilities, the Center
for Skills and Rural Industries Development and the PUP Pylon. By the end
of the 70’s decade, the transformation of the school from being a college to
be the first polytechnic university in the country was achieved. The passage
of Presidential Decree 1341 in 1978 provided for the conversion of PCC into
a chartered state university and its renaming as the Polytechnic University
of the Philippines (PUP).
As a polytechnic university, there were further broadening of
course offerings, re-structuring and establishment of new academic and
administrative units, and expansion of physical facilities and territories.
In addition to the offering of more graduate and undergraduate programs
under new disciplines were the creation of the Institute of Technology,
establishment of more branches and satellite campuses in the different
Luzon provinces in partnership with local government units, and expansion
of external linkages through consortia and signing of memorandum of
agreement with both local and foreign educational and development
institutions.
Ferdinand Marcos’ martial rule ended with the triumph of the EDSA
People Power in 1986. Upon release from detention, Prudente was reinstalled as PUP President. With the [In this] resumption of his presidency
and through the three decades that followed with the leadership of his
successors, namely Dr. Zenaida A. Olonan (1992-1997), Dr. Ofelia M. Carague
(1998-2002), Dr. Samuel M. Salvador (as Officer-in-Charge from 2003-2004),
and Dr. Dante G. Guevarra (2005-2011), the institution pursued its pioneering
and pro-people development perspectives. The Open University was
established and nontraditional study programs both in the undergraduate
and graduate school levels were offered. New programs and faculties
included Sociology; Philosophy; Political Science; Cooperatives; Civil,
Mechanical, Computer, Computer Engineering, Electronics and Electrical
Engineering; Education; Hospitality and Transportation Management; and
Chemistry among others.
PUP closed the century and welcomed the new millennium with
a vigorous computerization program and the establishment of the PUP
Information Technology Center. The launching of the Student Information
System made PUP one of the first state universities to have computerized
admission and registration of students. In 2011, PUP was awarded by the
Professional Regulatory Commission as the Third Best Performing School
in Nutrition and Dietetics. The research, publications and extension tasks of
PUP were strengthened by the establishment of research centers in various
disciplines and the adoption of the University Research Agenda as enshrined

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

3

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

in the University Research Manual. Memoranda of Agreement with external
partners for engagements and linkages were likewise forged towards more
usefulness of researches and expertise of the faculty to the communities
and society in general.
In 2012, Dr. Emanuel C. De Guzman was appointed PUP President and
became the first PUP alumnus to hold the top university position. Under his
administration, even more remarkable strides in the academics (including
performance in the licensure examinations), research and extension were
recorded. Majority of the academic programs have passed Levels 2 and
3 accreditation by the Accrediting Association of Chartered Colleges and
Universities of the Philippines (AACCUP). Survey ratings of industries
with regard their preference for PUP graduates continually rose. For two
consecutive years, in 2015 and 2016, PUP graduates were rated the most
preferred by employers.
In 2017, the University boasts of 92 academic programs offered in
the main campus, nine branches and thirteen satellite campuses. True to
its mandate, the University has touched the lives of thousands of Filipino
families in urban and rural communities. It is committed to persistently soar
high in pursuit of excellence and responsiveness of its academic and nonacademic programs in the name of service to the nation.
It was also in the same year that PUP intensified applied research,
advanced studies, and progressive leadership in varied fields. Aside from
offering ladder-type higher vocational, distance learning (open university
system), technical and professional programs in the area of business and
distributive arts, education and the social sciences related to the fields of
commerce, business administration and other polytechnic areas, it further
expanded its platforms by accommodating senior high school students in
the advent of K to 12 program.
The year 2018 highlighted the desire of PUP to continuously improve
as a significant academic community. In the same year alone, the student
enrollment throughout the campuses and branches reached an all-time high
at 120,000 plus. Moreover, the number of graduates increased drastically
which was at least 3,000 greater than the previous school year. This was
due to the emergence and growing popularity of Senior High School in the
University. In terms of accreditation, PUP was regarded as the top Internal
Quality Assurance Unit (IQAU) and the SUC with the second most number of
programs accredited by the Accrediting Agency of Chartered Colleges and
Universities in the Philippines (AACCUP) in 2018. It was also during this time
that the University received its ISO 9001:2015 certification by AJA Registrars
as a result of the collective efforts by the students, faculty, employees, and
administrators in improving the systems in the University.

4

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

From being a small college for potential office clerks and technicians,
to becoming a comprehensive university, PUP has perpetuated its place in
the Philippine academic community, earning its deserving label as Tanglaw
ng Bayan (the light of the nation). Today, it is recognized as the country’s
biggest contributor of human resources at various levels of work, in diverse
fields both in public and private bureaucracies and is most preferred by
employers over traditional top-notch universities to hire graduates from for
the past three years.
As the Tanglaw ng Bayan, [light of the nation] the Polytechnic University
of the Philippines beacons hope for the future leaders of this country. Being
the President of the University, Dr. Emanuel C. De Guzman is honored to be
given the opportunity to be of service to this institution, conveying integrity
and pride. This administration along with its most committed manpower has
always been extra resilient in contributing to stakeholders and in leading
the academe by upholding practices leading to civil society involvement,
critical approach to disciplines, and embedding a culture of research. Most
importantly, the PUP academic community has come to embrace change—
in paradigm and actions—as the core bearer of progress, development, and
eventual transformation to being an institution that produces, deploys, and
manages knowledge; thus, becoming an epistemic community.
Declaration of Principles
The Polytechnic University of the Philippines hereby adopts and
declares the following basic principles:
1.

The University shall contribute at all times to the attainment of
national development goals as it must be an instrument for the
development of citizenry and for the enhancement of nationbuilding.

2.

The University shall promote the democratization of access to
educational opportunities by all sectors of the national community.

3.

The University shall help accelerate the socio-economic
development of the countryside by ensuring that tertiary education
is within the reach of deserving members of rural communities.

4.

The University shall promote and maintain the building of a selfreliant and egalitarian society through a relevant, quality and total
University education.

5.

The University shall at all times encourage the students and faculty
in the pursuit of applied and useful knowledge.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

5

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

6

6.

As a University, it shall generate research that shall help maximize
institutional development and support national development
thrusts.

7.

The University commits to promote scientific consciousness
and develop relevant expertise and competence, stressing
their importance in building a truly independent and sovereign
Philippines; emphasize the unrestrained and unremitting search
for, and defense of truth as well as the advancement of moral
and spiritual values; promote awareness of our beneficial and
relevant cultural heritage; develop, promote and maintain in
the students and faculty self-discipline, nationalism, and social
consciousness, and the need to protect and defend human rights;
provide the students and faculty with liberal arts-based education
essential to broaden understanding and appreciation of life and
to the total development of the individual; make the students
and faculty conscious of applied technological, social as well as
politico-economic problems and encourage them to contribute
to the nationalist industrialization and overall socio-economic
development of the country; and develop, use, nurture, improve and
propagate the national language and other Philippine languages,
and ensure proficiency in English as well as other languages
required by/of the students’ field of specialization.

8.

To fulfill the foregoing commitments, the University shall foster
high quality campus environment, broaden opportunities for the
intellectually-qualified and/or scientifically-inclined students
through school fees within the reach of even the socio-economically
disadvantaged students; strive to promote the welfare of its
members through the improvement of salary levels, security of
tenure and through scholarships, training and development
programs, better working conditions, as well as the rational
use of time and resources; undertake vigorous efforts toward
institutional linkages, particularly in the areas of common concern
like training and retraining, equipment and audio-visual use, and
other existing, modern and applied technological advancement;
strengthen research, publication, and creative works; model
quality management and fiscal responsibility; improve sense of
community involvement and linkages; institutionalize principles
of academic freedom and responsibility; promote academic
excellence in student/faculty performance nationally and
internationally; value and enrich cultural heritage, integrate
information and communication technology with instructions,
research, service and production; evaluate wholesome living and

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

working environment for faculty, employees, and students; and
strategize and institutionalize income-generating projects.
9.

To formulate and implement new and relevant curricula and, at the
same time, supplement curricular activities with carefully-planned
co-curricular interests and undertaking.

10. To emphasize on the need to improve indigenous Philippine science,
technology and research; and to stress, above all, continued and
regular improvement of the contents and quality of PUP education
together with orienting course offerings toward sustaining Filipino
manpower requirements and entrepreneurial needs.
Shared Values
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

God-Fearing
Love for Humanity and Democracy
Collegiality
Integrity and Credibility
Transparency and Accountability
Passion for Learning
Patriotism
Humanist Internationalism

Mandate
Presidential Decree No.1341 has mandated the PUP to expand the
program offerings of the University to include courses in polytechnic areas
and has also given the University the authority to expand diametrically
through the establishment of branches, consortia and linkages.
The Governance of PUP
The governance of the University is vested in the Board of Regents (BOR).
The administration and exercise of its corporate powers are vested exclusively
in the BOR. At present, the BOR of PUP is composed of the following: the
Commission on Higher Education (CHED) Chairman/Commissioner as
Chairman; the President of the PUP as Vice Chairman and the members:
the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Education, Arts and Culture; the
Chairman of the Committee on Higher and Technical Education of the House
of Representatives, Congress of the Philippines; the Regional Director of the
National Economic Development Authority (NEDA); the Regional Director of
the Department of Science and Technology; the President of the University
Faculty Federation; the President of the University Alumni Federation; two

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

7

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

(2) prominent citizens who have rendered notable accomplishments in
their profession; and the President of the Supreme Student Council or the
student representative elected by the student council of the University.
The University has two councils: (1) Academic Council; and (2)
Administrative Council. The Academic Council is composed of the President
of the University as Chairman and all professors (assistant, associate, and
full) of the University as members. It is empowered to prescribe curricula
and rules of discipline subject to the approval of the BOR. It shall determine
and fix requirements for University admission, retention and graduation,
and recommends candidates for graduation to the Board. The Council
also exercises disciplinary power over students of the University within
the limits prescribed by the rules of discipline approved by the BOR. The
Administrative Council is composed of the President of the University as
Chairman and the vice presidents, directors, deans and other officials of
equal rank as members. This council is, likewise, entrusted to recommend
policies governing the administration, management and development
programs of the University as approved by the Board.
The PUP Logo

The star in the logo stands for the perfection of the human person as
well as the search for truth, while the five concentric circles depict infinite
wisdom.
Both the five-pointed star and the five concentric circles stand for
quintessence, which is the highest form of quality or the most perfect
example of creation.
The star is golden yellow not only because this is a star’s natural color
but also because together with the dark maroon used as background, it is
the traditional color of the University. The five concentric circles are white
as a symbol of purity.

8

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Imno ng PUP
(Komposisyon nina Siegfredo Calabig, Susan Roldan, at Raffy
Amaranto)
Sintang Paaralan, tanglaw ka ng bayan
Pandayan ng isip ng kabataan
Kami ay dumating na salat sa yaman
Hanap na dunong ay iyong alay.
Ang layunin mong makatao
Dinarangal ang Pilipino
Ang iyong aral, diwa, adhikang taglay
PUP, aming gabay
Paaralang dakila
PUP, pinagpala.
Gagamitin ang karunungan
Mula sa iyo, para sa bayan.
Ang iyong aral, diwa, adhikang taglay
PUP, aming gabay
Paaralang dakila
PUP, pinagpala

TITLE 2
S T U D E NT R I GHT S
Section 1. Fundamental Rights
1.1 Education is a right. It is the responsibility of the State to provide quality
and accessible education. Thus, it is the responsibility of the State to support
and give priority to education as a basic right of all citizens.
1.2 Right to Admission and Non-discrimination. No student shall be denied
admission to nor be expelled by the school on account of his/her physical
disability, socio-economic status, political or religious beliefs, sexual
orientation, or membership in student organizations; neither shall pregnant
students, nor certified reformed drug abusers be deprived of such privilege.
No student shall be punished with disciplinary action and be denied services,
scholarships and other privileges on account of the same.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

9

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

1.3 Every PUP student has the right to be safe, and to be free from actions,
and omissions that endanger safety and peace of mind. He/She must be
free from any mental or physical threats, torture, force, violence, hazing,
intimidation and all other means which vitiates the student’s right to be
safe within the University. Also, the student has a right against being held in
secret, incommunicado, or in similar forms of solitary detention.
1.4 Right to competent instruction and relevant quality of education. Every
student has the right to competent instruction and quality education relevant
to his/her personal and cultural development and that of the nation.
1.5 Every student has the right to be treated with dignity and respect at all
times by all members of the PUP community and within PUP campuses.
1.6 Every student shall enjoy, within the confines of the University, the
freedom of opinion, of speech, and of expression. They should also enjoy
right of access to media in their respective activities. They shall also have
the right to print, circulate, and/or mount leaflets, newsletters, posters, wall
news, petitions, and other such materials. School authorities shall ensure
the provision of facilities such as bulletin boards for the mounting of the
aforementioned materials subject to existing rules and regulations.
1.7 Students shall have the right to accurate information about matters
directly affecting their interests and welfare inside the University. They shall
be informed of duly approved rules and policies defining and governing
proper conduct and the system of sanctions and consequences that are in
place. University officials and officers of student governments are obliged to
present periodically in public, reports detailing the state of their respective
offices.
1.8 A student is entitled to prompt correction of his or her official records if an
error is found and duly proven.
1.9 Students shall have the right to be informed and consulted regarding all
tuition and other fee increase.
Section 2. Academic Rights
2.1

Every PUP student has the right to receive competent
instruction and relevant quality education. Therefore, the
University shall ensure that:
2.1.1

10

faculty members are available during consultation
hours specified in their teaching assignment.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

2.1.2

faculty members submit the final grades of their
students within the submission deadlines specified
in the academic calendar.

2.2

Students are entitled to sufficient course information,
academic advice, and general guidance from faculty, staff,
fellow students, and other members of the University, in order
to make wise decisions regarding their training.

2.3

Students must be informed, in formal writing, of the academic
standards that will be applied in any course of study for which
they are enrolled in. Within the first week of the semester,
the instructor must provide students with the full course
description, the learning objectives, the course requirements,
the evaluation method, deadlines and academic consequences,
and acceptable academic collaboration.

2.4

Every student shall have fair access to adequate University
services and facilities. The libraries of PUP shall be open to
students and non-students alike, in accordance with dulyapproved University rules and regulations.

2.5

Students shall be guaranteed of academic freedom to the
extent that they may pursue independent inquiry that is free
from unwarranted interference and influence, and to express
contrary opinions and points of view.
Student’s academic freedom shall consist of, but not limited
to, the following:
2.5.1
2.5.2
2.5.3

2.5.4

conduct research in connection with academic work,
and to freely discuss and publish their findings and
recommendations;
conduct inquiry on curricular and extracurricular
activities within the campus and in appropriate
circumstances;
choose a field of study for research, and to pursue
the quest for truth, as well as to express their opinion
on any subject of public or general concern which
directly or indirectly affects the students or the
educational system;
invite off-campus speakers or resource persons to
student-sponsored assemblies, fora, symposia, and
other activities of similar nature;

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

11

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

2.5.5
2.5.6
2.5.7

2.5.8

express contrary interpretations or dissenting
opinions inside and outside the classroom;
participate in the drafting of new curriculum, and in
the review or revision of the old;
participate in the drafting and/or revision of the
student handbook which shall include the school
rules and regulations, with copy of which to be
furnished the student upon admission to the school;
and,
freely discuss and criticize university and national
policies.

2.6

Every student has the right to fair, transparent, and objective
evaluation of his or her academic performance based on dulyapproved standards of excellence.

2.7

Every student must be given the opportunity to evaluate
objectively the faculty performance and course delivery,
curriculum of degree program, and course syllabus without
fear of reprisal.

Section 3. Representation Rights

12

3.1

Students are free to establish and run structures of selfgovernance, mechanisms for advocacy, and systems of
decision-making that protect and promote their democratic
rights and welfare. To this end, the University shall support
and facilitate the creation and operation of student councils
and student publications.

3.2

Students must be duly represented in decision-making,
policy-making, and adjudicatory bodies as well as provide
opportunity to participate in or influence the governance of
the University. They shall have the right to examine existing
school policies, initiate appropriate amendments, and appeal
decisions of policy-making bodies that affect student interests
and welfare. In all policy matters, the University shall uphold
the principle of collective decision-making and due process.

3.3

Students are free to form, assist, join, or participate in
organizations, societies or alliances in the University, in pursuit
of common interests and lawful goals. Students have the right
to create and decide independently the rules on membership,
policies, and actions of the group.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

3.4

Student membership or non-membership to any organization
with lawful goals should not be a basis for admission to or
expulsion from the University.

3.5

Students have the right to use needed University facilities for
programs and activities subject to prevailing University rules
and regulations. The University shall designate and provide
proper student centers that shall be jointly managed by the
University and student government.

3.6

The production of student publication shall be subject
to existing accounting and auditing regulations. School
authorities shall not unduly sanction editors, managers, and
writers of campus press and media due to editorial policy
or content disapproval or disagreement with any other PUP
stakeholder.

3.7

Students must be free to air and seek redress of grievances.

Section 4. Right to Organize and Right of Association
4.1

Right to organize and right of association. The right of students
to form, assist, join and actively participate in any campus
organizations, unions, societies, nationwide youth groups,
alliances or federations, for purpose not contrary to law shall
not be abridged.

4.2

Right to hold activities. The rights of organizations to conduct
activities inside and outside campus for purposes not contrary
to law shall not be reduced.
The school administration shall provide space for the offices
of student organizations within the premises of the school.
Furthermore, the school administration shall allow student
organizations to use school facilities free of charge subject to
the existing policies of the University.

Section 5. Procedural Rights
5.1

Every student has the right to due process and to the integrity
of the administrative procedures.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

13

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

5.2

University policies or regulations, especially those that are
penal or analogous in nature, shall be enforced prospectively.

5.3

Students are entitled to prompt and proper resolution of cases.

5.4

Students have the right to appeal all decisions of the University
while exhausting all possible administrative remedies in
accordance with the PUP Charter and its implementing rules
and regulations.

Section 6. Other Rights
6.1

Student shall not be denied entry to the University provided
that he/she sufficiently presents proof that he/she is a bona
fide student of the school.

6.2

Students with outstanding fees shall have the right to take
an examination. Nevertheless, such students shall be subject
to the right of the school to suspend enrollment and/or to
withhold the release or issuance of their school clearance
prior to their graduation until all prior delinquencies are fully
paid.

6.3

The University shall protect the students against militarization
within the school campus except the ROTC. The pursuit of
academic excellence and exercise of academic freedom
can be attained only in an atmosphere free from fear
and unreasonable restraint. Pursuant thereto, no military
detachment or personnel shall be installed inside the school
premises.

6.4 Right to Express
6.4.1

Every student has the right to express his/her sexual
orientation, gender identity, and expression.
6.4.2 Right to hold exhibition of talents. Students have the
right to showcase their talents in culture and the arts.
6.4.3 Every student has the right to articulate their
ideology. Students must respect other’s perspective
and ideology to attain harmony.
6.5 Right to avail of University Services. The students have the right
to avail of the University services; for this purpose, all offices shall
strive to inform the students of the services available.

14

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

TITLE 3
GE NE R A L R E GU L AT I O NS
Section 1. The regulations of PUP as set forth in this Handbook are formulated
to ascertain orderliness necessary in the pursuit of knowledge, to guide the
students in attaining the best possible quality of work required of them, and
to ensure their desirable deportment.
Section 2. Every PUP student is expected to observe and abide by all policies
and regulations of the University; thus, he/she is committed to uphold these
rules and regulations.
Section 3. Every PUP student is an extension and reflection of the University.
Henceforth, whether on- or off-campus, he/she is expected to be a model of
the highest norms of behavior befitting a true scholar, a future professional,
and a respectable citizen.
Section 4. Students are expected to know the philosophy, vision and mission
of the University, the meaning of its logo, and the Imno ng PUP.
Section 5. He/She shall observe and respect the laws of the land, the
standards of organized society, the code of conduct, and rules and
regulations of the University.
Section 6. He/She shall, in words and in deeds, observe the usual norms
of courtesy and etiquette in all areas of interpersonal relationships with all
members of the University community.
Section 7. He/She is expected to show respect and deference to all members
of the academe including visitors in the campus.
Section 8. Students are expected to cooperate in classroom procedures, as
well as in keeping clean and orderly classrooms, corridors, walls, boards,
furniture, equipment, the campus premises and the structures and other
facilities therein. Students shall not post or inscribe offensive or indecent
language in the form of graffiti.
Section 9. Students shall not display boisterous or unbecoming behavior, and
rude actions that tend to disrupt and disturb the teaching-learning process.
Section 10. Students are encouraged to attend activities that are sponsored
by the University, college, department, and/or campus/branch.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

15

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

Section 11. Students are not allowed to stay inside the University premises
beyond curfew time (10PM to 6AM), Sundays (except for NSTP/ROTC
classes), holidays, or when classes are suspended.
Section 12. In case where there is no registered parent/guardian to sign
a permit or any other document of a student, the student shall be the only
authorized person to sign.
Section 13. Only offices of the University shall use the name, logo, and seal
of the University. Students, as individuals or groups, shall not be allowed
to use the name and logo of the University without the recommendation
of the activity adviser/chairperson, and the approval of the duly
authorized University Official. This applies to printed programs, invitations,
announcements, letters, tickets, and the like.

TITLE 4
CO D E O F CO ND U CT
To ensure an atmosphere conducive to the pursuit of academic
excellence and the formation of responsible and productive Filipino citizens,
as well as to maintain the order necessary for the common good, every PUP
student shall strictly abide by the following University rules and regulations.
Section 1. He/She shall observe the following guidelines on the use of the
official identification card (ID).
1.1 Upon admission to the University, every PUP student is
issued an official ID card which must be validated by the
concerned College at the start of every term.
1.2 Students shall wear their ID conspicuously at all times while
inside the campus.
Section 2. A PUP student proven to have violated the foregoing rules on
ID and registration certificate shall be subject to disciplinary measures as
specified in Title 9, Code of Discipline of this Handbook or as determined by
the Director of Student Services. Any of the following shall be considered a
violation of the foregoing rules:
2.1 failure to secure ID on time due to late filing of application;
2.2 failure to bring validated ID and non-presentation of currently
validated registration certificate at the Security Post;
2.3 failure to conspicuously wear validated ID inside the Campus;
2.4 loss of ID without justifiable cause;

16

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

2.5 use of fake ID;
2.6 use of non-validated ID;
2.7 use of another person’s ID; and
2.8 lending of one’s ID for use of another person.
Section 3. In no case shall the ID and registration certificate be confiscated
from a student unless ordered by the Student Disciplinary Board (SDB).
However, if a student is caught in the act of violating any of the rules and
regulations of the University, any concerned University personnel may
demand for his/her ID for proper identification and reporting to concerned
authorities without confiscating the same.
Section 4. In the implementation of the guidelines on the use of ID/
registration certificate, utmost courtesy is expected at all times.
Section 5. PUP students may dress up according to their individual taste,
but they are required to adhere to the conventions of decency and proper
grooming.
Note: In cases where a Department/College/Branch/Campus would
have a uniform, this must be approved by at least the majority of the students,
and noted by the College/Branch/Campus Student Council President and the
Dean/Director. However, it should not be made compulsory and should not
be taken against the students in any form.
Section 6. Every PUP student is prohibited from smoking, drinking alcoholic
beverages, gambling, taking prohibited drugs, or engaging in any unlawful
activity while inside the University premises.
Section 7. The student should not destroy or deface any structure, classroom,
facility, equipment, or any other property of the University.
Section 8. Accredited student organizations and student councils may be
allowed to use school facilities for their meetings, seminars, conferences,
cultural presentations, athletic activities, and the like, subject to the PUP
Guidelines on the Use of University Facilities.
Section 9. Any student who wishes to participate in any activity outside the
campus as a representative of the University shall comply with the existing
guidelines on the conduct of off-campus student activities.
Section 10. Students who intend to release to the press or similar channels
of public communication notices and other announcements concerning
University activities must secure a written clearance from the University

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

17

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

President as endorsed by the Director of the Communication Management
Office (CMO).
Section 11. Students who invite guests from outside (e.g. guest lecturers,
speakers, seminar participants, viewers of exhibits, and the like) are required
to obtain prior approval from the Director of Student Services or his/her
duly authorized representative by submitting letter of request indicating the
name of visitors, purpose of visit, and expected date and time of arrival. The
approved request together with the accomplished form shall be forwarded
to the Security Office for information and appropriate action.
Section 12. Students’ educational tours, field visits / trips, and other similar
activities, shall be subject to existing guidelines on off-campus activities.
Section 13. Students and/or student organizations shall not engage in
any fund-raising activity without the necessary approval of the authorized
University official/s and without complying with the existing guidelines on
fund raising.
Section 14. Students who violate the aforementioned rules and regulations
shall be meted with corresponding disciplinary measures as stated in Title
9 - Code of Discipline of this Handbook.

TITLE 5
ACA D E M I C R E GU L AT I O NS ,
PR OCE D U R E S A ND S E RV I CE S
Section 1. Schedule of Fees and Payments
1.1 The educational expenses of PUP students are borne by the State
as stipulated in RA 10931. The University charges a fixed
amount per unit/hour. Laboratory fees may vary according to
the laboratory subject.
1.2

Information regarding tuition and other fees may be found in the
PUP Website, or may be secured from the Accounting Office Student Services Section.

1.3 Compulsory collection of fees on books, manuals, modules, tickets,
and the like which is not approved by the Board of Regents is
strictly prohibited.

18

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Section 2. Scholarship and Financial Assistance
2.1

On the basis of academic performance and exemplary abilities
and skills, the University grants scholarships (entrance,
resident, and special grants), as well as financial assistance
(service grant-in-aid, student loan, and work-study plan or
student assistantship) to deserving students. These students
are given incentive equivalent to total assessed fees, either full
or partial.

2.2

Information regarding scholarships and financial assistance is
available at the Scholarship and Financial Assistance Services
(SFAS).

Section 3. Registration and Cross-Registration
3.1

Only students who are officially enrolled shall be allowed to
attend classes.

3.2

A student is considered officially enrolled when his/her
registration certificate has been issued by the Office of
Admission Services / Registrar of Branches and Campuses
/ Registrar of Open University / Registrar of Institute of
Technology

3.3

No student shall be registered later than the date specified in
the University calendar.

3.4

A student of the University may be authorized by the concerned
Dean/Director and given permission by the University
Registrar to cross-register in another accredited institution of
higher learning if the subject/s in which he/she needs to enroll
during a given term is/are not offered in the University.

Section 4. Academic Load
4.1

In general, one academic unit is equivalent to at least fifty four
(54) lecture hours or the corresponding laboratory hours.

4.2

No undergraduate student shall be allowed to take more than
the number of units in each semester as specified in his/her
curriculum except for graduating or academically outstanding
students with general weighted average of at least 1.75 in the
previous regular semester except summer term and certified

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

19

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

by the College Dean. A maximum of additional nine (9) units
may be given to them.
4.3

A transferee, shiftee, returnee, or a student with back subjects
is allowed to enroll in maximum of two (2) subjects during
summer term.

4.4

A graduating student is allowed to take two (2) Physical
Education (PE) courses in his/her last semester.

4.5

As a general rule, no student shall be allowed to take
any subject until he/she has satisfactorily passed the
prerequisite subject/s. However, a student may be allowed to
simultaneously enroll in co-requisite subjects under any of the
following conditions subject to recommendation of the Dean
and approval of the Vice President for Academic Affairs:
4.5.1
4.5.2
4.5.3

when the prerequisite is a repeated subject;
when the student has superior scholastic standing;
and
when the student is graduating at the end of the
school term.

Note: A student is considered graduating if he/she is
completing all academic requirements during his/her last
semester.
Section 5. Changing of Classes, Substitution and Dropping of Subjects

20

5.1

The student shall accomplish Application for Change of
Enrollment (ACE) Form which can be downloaded from the
PUP website for approval of the Chairperson/Dean and for
submission to the Registrar’s Office.

5.2

Changes in Subject/Section/Schedule or adding/dropping of
subject should be done within the adjustment period specified
in the University Calendar and must be approved by the Dean/
Chairperson.

5.3

Tagging of change in subject or schedule should be processed
by the respective Department. After tagging, the student
should check his/her SIS account to verify if the change in
subject or schedule is reflected.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

5.4

No substitution shall be allowed for major and mandated
subjects prescribed in the curriculum except when, in the
evaluation of the Chairperson of the Department offering the
prescribed subject, the proposed substitute is substantially
equivalent in content to the required subject. The Dean
shall recommend such substitution for approval of the Vice
President for Academic Affairs.

5.5

Substitution of subject/s may be authorized if a curriculum has
been superseded by a new one. In case of curricular revision,
the student follows the curriculum he/she was enrolled in upon
admission.

5.6

Substitution should
5.6.1

involve subjects within the same department if possible,
and if not, the substitute subject must be allied to the
one being substituted;
5.6.2 be between subjects of the same number of units; and
5.6.3 be recommended by the Dean of the College/Institute
or Director of the Campus/Branch offering the subject
for approval by the VPAA.
Section 6. Classification of Students
6.1 According to admission status:
6.1.1

6.1.2

6.1.3

6.1.4

Freshmen – Students admitted through the PUP
College Entrance Test (PUPCET), have not enrolled in
any academic college subject prior to their enrolment
in the University, and have submitted to the Admissions
and Registration Services all the documents required
for formal acceptance in PUP
Resident students – Bonafide students including those
who are not officially enrolled and by virtue of their
approved written petition for leave of absence (LOA)
may be considered for re-admission provided their LOA
did not exceed (1) academic year
Returning Students (Returnees) – Students considered
for readmission depending on their previous scholastic
performance, the availability of slots, and must have
complied with all other requirements for readmission
Transferring Students (Transferees) - (a) From a PUP

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

21

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

6.1.5

6.1.6

Branch/Campus – Students admitted as transferees
upon the recommendation of the Branch Director
depending upon the availability of slot and their
compliance with all the requirements for admission;
and (b) From Another School – Students admitted
as transferees depending on the availability of slots
provided they have met all the academic and admission
requirements set by the University
Re-enrolling Baccalaureate Degree Holders – Students
who may be admitted to a post-baccalaureate
program or any other special program of the University
depending on the availability of slots and the approval
of the College Dean and Office of Admission Services
Cross-enrollees – Includes students from PUP Branch/
Campus enrolling of subject/s in PUP Main Campus or
other Branch/Campus and students enrolling subjects
offered in other programs
(For detailed information, please see Admission Policies
and Requirements Brochure or visit the PUP Website.)

6.2 According to academic load, students enrolled in the University
are classified as follows:
6.2.1
6.2.2
6.2.3
6.2.4

22

Regular student – one who is registered for formal
academic credits and who carries the full load required
in a given semester by his/her curriculum
Irregular student – one who has deficiency/back
subjects
Special student – one who is not earning formal
academic credits
Special-needs student – PUP gives importance to the
following modified educational facilities and equipment,
as minimum requirements, for special students needing
special education.

a.

For persons with visual impairment – sensory and tactile
materials, Braille books and record materials, Braille
writing, painting and reading machines, orientation and
mobility equipment.

b.

For persons with hearing impairment – group or
individual hearing aids, speech trainers, tape recorders
and speech or language kit containing auditory and
language training materials.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

c.

For persons with orthopedic handicaps – the
requirements stipulated under Batas Pambansa Bilang
344, otherwise known as the Accessibility Law, shall be
complied, including the provision of adjustable desks or
chairs and adopted physical education apparatuses.
Other types of learners with special needs or those
with behavioral problems including autism, those
with learning disabilities’, and those with multiple
handicaps-instructional devices and equipment for
behavior modification, perceptual motor training, daily
living skills, language and speech and cognitive skills
development (Based on CHED Memo 30, s. 2009,
CHED Memo No. 9 s.2013 “Enhanced Policies and
Guidelines on Student Affairs and Services”, RA 7277
Magna Carta for Person with Disabilities and RA 9442
– An Act Amending Republic Act No. 7277, Otherwise
Known As The “Magna Carta For Disabled Persons,
And For Other Purposes”).
See PUP Policy and Guidelines for Students with
Disabilities (appendix 1, page 74)

6.3 According to year level, students enrolled in the University are
classified as follows:
6.3.1

6.3.2

6.3.3

Freshman – one who is on the first year of his/her
curriculum, or who has not finished the prescribed
subjects of the first year of his curriculum, or 25% of
the total number of units required in his/her entire
course
Sophomore – one who is on the second year of his/
her curriculum, or who has satisfactorily completed
the prescribed subjects for the first-year level of his/
her curriculum, or has finished more than 25% but less
than 50% of the total number of units required in his/
her entire course
Junior – one who is on the third year of his/her
curriculum, or who has completed the prescribed
subjects for the first- and second-year levels of his/
her curriculum or has finished more than 50% but less
than 75% of the total number of units required in his/
her entire course

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

23

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

6.3.4

6.3.5

Senior – one who is on the fourth year of his/her
curriculum, or who has completed the prescribed
subjects for the first, second, and third year levels of
his/her curriculum or has finished 75% or more of the
total number of units required in his/her entire course
Fifth year – in the College of Engineering or College
of Architecture and Fine Arts, a student who is on the
fifth-year level of his/her curriculum is considered
a senior if he/she has completed at least 80% of the
curricular requirements.

Section 7. Attendance

24

7.1

Students are required to attend all classes starting with the first
meeting of every subject. Non-attendance in any of the required
class or academic activity constitutes an absence.

7.2

A student shall be considered absent from class if he/she is not
present after the first thirty (30) minutes of the scheduled class
time.

7.3

Three incidences of tardiness shall be considered as one
absence from class.

7.4

Any student who has incurred absence from the class must,
whenever required by the faculty member concerned, shall
obtain an excuse slip from the Office of the Counseling and
Psychological Services (OCPS).

7.5

Absence duly authorized in writing by the University by reason
of officially representing the University to certain function or
affair shall be excused. The Dean/Chairperson/ or Director/
Academic Head shall inform the faculty member/s concerned.

7.6

Absence due to illness may be excused if the student submits
a medical certificate issued by the University Medical Office,
or any other physician provided that in the latter’s case, the
medical certificate shall be authenticated by the University
Medical Office and presented to the Office of the Counseling
and Psychological Services (OCPS) for the issuance of an
excuse slip.

7.7

Excused absences are for time missed only. All works covered
by the class during the student’s absence will have to be made
up by the student within a reasonable period of time.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

7.8

Three successive unexcused absences shall be reported by the
faculty member concerned to the Director of the Office of the
Counseling and Psychological Services (OCPS) who shall call
for the student and notify his/her parents or guardian.

7.9

A student who has been absent for at least 20% of the total class
hours in one subject for the semester shall be automatically
dropped from the class roll.

7.10

No student shall be denied access/entry to class due to
tardiness. Student may, however, be marked absent and may
not take part in any graded examination.

Section 8. Grading System
8.1

Students shall be graded or marked in accordance with the
following system.

Grade/Mark

Percentage/
Equivalence

Description

1.0

97-100

Excellent

1.25

94-96

Excellent

1.5

91-93

Very Good

1.75

88-90

Very Good

2.0

85-87

Good

2.25

82-84

Good

2.5

79-81

Satisfactory

2.75

76-78

Satisfactory

3.0

75

Passing

5.0

65-74

Failure

Inc.

Incomplete

W

Withdrawn

8.2

An Incomplete (Inc.) mark is temporarily given to a student who
may qualify for passing but has not taken any major exam or
its equivalent. Such requirement(s) must be satisfied within
one year from the end of the term; otherwise, the grade shall
automatically be replaced by “5”.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

25

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

8.3

A Withdrawn Mark (W) is given if the student voluntarily
withdraws in writing from a subject at any time or when the
faculty member drops the student from his/her roll for having
exceeded the allowable number of absences or for not having
attended the class since the start of the term. W mark should
not be converted into a grade of “5” and should not be included
in the computation of the general weighted average.

8.4

A student who received a passing grade in a subject shall not
be allowed to take another examination for the purpose of
improving his/her grade.

Section 9. Late Reporting of Grade/s, Mark/s and Correction of Entry
Correction of Entry should be accomplished within a period
of one semester upon receipt of grade. Grade should be
submitted two (2) weeks after the end of the term.
Section 10. Completion of Incomplete Mark
10.1

Incomplete Mark/s must be completed within one (1) year.
The student must accomplish and submit completion form
to the subject teacher. The subject teacher will submit the
accomplished completion form together with a photocopy of
class record to the College. Subsequently, the college shall
forward it to the Registrar’s Office within a period of one year.
(Completion form is downloadable from the PUP website.)

10.2

In no case shall the period for the removal of the Incomplete
mark extend beyond one year from the end of the term when
the subject was taken, unless justified and approved by the
VPAA and acknowledged by the University Registrar.

Section 11. Integration Period and Examinations

26

11.1

A one-week integration period shall be scheduled before the
final examinations to enable students to review, provided that
the faculty members shall keep regular hours for consultation
work.

11.2

The schedule of examinations as specified in the University
calendar for the school year shall be observed unless changed
to another date as authorized by the College Dean/Branch or
Campus Director concerned.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

11.3 The schedule of make-up classes shall be agreed upon by both
the students and the subject instructor considering that it will
not affect nor interrupt any class or student activities on that
particular day. Make-up classes shall be considered when
classes are affected by class suspensions due to climate/
natural disasters or important events.
Section 12. Scholastic Standing and Delinquency
12.1

Each college shall implement the following rules on scholastic
delinquency.
12.1.1

Warning. Any student who at the end of the semester
obtains final grades of “5” in 15% or less of the
total number of academic units in which he/she is
registered shall be warned by the Dean or Director
concerned to improve his/her academic performance.
If he/she fails or gets incomplete marks in 16 - 30%
of the total number of registered academic units, he/
she shall be warned by the Dean/Director, and his/her
load shall be reduced by three (3) units.

12.1.2

Probation. (a) Any student who, at the end of the
semester obtains final grades of “5” in 31-50% of
the total number of academic units in which he/she
has enrolled shall be placed on probation for the
succeeding semester and his/her academic load
shall be correspondingly reduced by six (6) units
by the Dean or Director concerned; (b) Any student
who has received two successive warnings shall
be placed on probation. Probation may be lifted the
following semester if the student passes all of his/
her subjects in which he/she has final failing grades;
(c) Any student who has been placed on probation
for two successive semesters shall be dropped from
the rolls of his/her College. However, he/she may be
readmitted to another College of the University where
he/she qualifies; and (d) Any student on probation
who again fails in 50% or more of the total number of
units in which he/she is enrolled for the semester shall
be dropped from the rolls of the University.

12.1.3

Dismissal. Any student who, at the end of the
semester, obtains final grades of “5” in 5l%-75% of the
total number of academic units shall be dropped from

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

27

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

the rolls of the College concerned; if more than 75%,
he/she shall be dismissed from the University and
be permanently disqualified from readmission to the
University.
12.2

A grade of incomplete shall not be included in the computation.
When it is replaced by a final grade, the latter is to be included
in the grades during the semester when the removal is made.

12.3

Required subjects which a student has failed shall take
precedence over other subjects in his/her succeeding
enrollment.

12.4

In colleges or schools where the weight of the subject is not
expressed in terms of units, the computation shall be based on
the respective equivalents.

12.5

A student may transfer from one college to another within the
University provided that
12.5.1

he/she has completed the one-year residency
requirement of the University as only incoming
second year student will be allowed to shift to another
program;

12.5.2

his/her release from the college in which he/she is
previously enrolled is approved by the Dean;

12.5.3

he/she satisfies the requirements of the college where
he/she intends to enroll; and

12.5.4

there is available slot for additional student in the
college where he/she intends to enroll.

Note: Action to be taken is based on number of failures. (See
Table of Scholastic Delinquency)
Section 13. Completion of Basic Courses in NSTP and P.E.
13.1

28

No college student shall be permitted to enroll in third year
unless he/she has completed the two-year basic course in P.E.,
and six units in National Service Training Program (Reserve
Officers’ Training Corps or Civic Welfare Training Service), or
unless the said student has been duly granted permission to
defer the taking of the course by authorities concerned.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

13.2

All students (except international students) are required under
the law to enroll in NSTP or its equivalent, and shall not be
allowed to cross-enroll in NSTP in any other institution unless
given expressed permission by the NSTP Office and approved
by the Registrar’s Office.

13.3

Students who are differently abled and/or are under restriction
for reason of religious beliefs are also required to officially enroll
in P.E., ROTC, or CWTS. However, these students shall be given
special tasks or assignments.

13.4

No student shall be allowed to graduate without having
complied with Section 13 hereof.

Section 14. Tenure, Leave of Absence, and Honorable Dismissal
14.1

Tenure
14.1.1

		

14.1.2

A student must finish the requirements of a college
degree program within one and one-half (1½) times
the normal length of the prescribed period; otherwise,
he/she shall not be readmitted into the University.
N.B
It is noted, however, that if a student fails to complete
his/her bachelor’s degree within a year after the
period prescribed in his/her program, he/she will
no longer be recipient of the “Universal Access to
Quality Tertiary Education Act of 2017” (RA 10931).
In case a student is officially given permission for leave
of absence (maximum of one academic year only),
the leave shall not be included in the computation
of tenure. If a student incurs more than a year leave
of absence, he/she shall be admitted [as] upon the
evaluation and recommendation of the Chairperson/
Academic Head/Dean/Director and approval of the
Vice President for Academic Affairs.

14.2 Leave of Absence
14.2.1

A student intending to take a leave of absence
exceeding one semester but not to exceed one
academic year shall file a letter of intent before the

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

29

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

start of the semester to the University Registrar for
approval as recommended by the College Dean/
Branch Director.
14.2.2 A student who withdraws from the University without a
formal leave of absence shall apply for readmission.
14.3 Honorable Dismissal
14.3.1

14.3.2

Honorable Dismissal is issued by the University
Registrar to a student who withdraws from the
University for purpose of transferring to another
school.
A student applying for Honorable Dismissal shall be
cleared of all accountabilities before a certificate is
issued to him/her.

14.3.3

A student who leaves the University by reason
of expulsion, dropping due to disciplinary action
or suspension shall not be entitled to Honorable
Dismissal.

14.3.4

A student who has been issued Honorable Dismissal/
Transfer Credentials cannot be readmitted to the
University.

14.3.5

A student who is considered scholastically delinquent
based on the Table of Delinquency shall be issued
Honorable Dismissal provided that he/she is not
expelled by way of a disciplinary action.

Section15. Graduation with Honors

30

15.1

The honors committee shall be composed of the VPAA as
chair and Deans and Branch/Campus Directors as members.

15.2

The secretariat shall be composed of the University Registrar,
heads of Scholarship and Financial Assistance Services
(SFAS), and heads of Information and Communication
Technology Office (ICTO).

15.3

The Office of the University Registrar (OUR) in close
coordination with the SFAS and ICTO shall determine and
recommend to the University Honors Committee a student
who completes his/her baccalaureate degree with any of the
following weighted averages to graduate with honors.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Summa Cum Laude – 1.0000 to 1.1500
Magna Cum Laude – 1.1501 to 1.3500
Cum Laude		
– 1.3501 to 1.6000
15.2

The following are the guidelines on academic honors for
graduating students.
15.2.1

A student’s final grades during his/her last school
term shall be finalized 14 days after the last day of final
examination period for graduating students.
15.2.2
Only finalized grades shall be considered in the
computation of the general weighted average.
15.2.3
Only academic courses shall be included in the
computation of general weighted average.
15.2.4
The candidate must have
 carried the prescribed load in his/her curriculum;
 no final grade lower than 2.5, incomplete
grade and withdrawn in any academic or nonacademic subject.
 no final grade of 5.0 in any academic or
non-academic subject prescribed in his/her
curriculum.
 completed the degree on the prescribed period;
 no record of misconduct/misbehavior during
his/her stay in the University; and
 no financial accountabilities.
15.2.5 A shifter shall be considered a candidate with
Academic Honors provided he/she satisfies the
academic and residency requirements.
15.2.6 Transferees, except those from PUP branches and
satellite campuses are disqualified from graduating
with honors.
Section 16. Graduation Requirements
16.1

A candidate for graduation shall file his/her application for
graduation on-line using his/her SIS account within the period
indicated in the University calendar.

16.2

An application for graduation of the student can be processed
only if he/she obtained passing grades in all his/her subjects
required in the curriculum.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

31

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

16.3

A student shall be recommended for graduation when he/she
has satisfied all academic and other requirements prescribed
by the University.

16.5

A candidate for graduation shall have his/her deficiencies
completed and his/her records cleared not later than two
weeks before the end of his/her last semester.

16.6

All candidates for graduation are required to attend the
graduation or commencement rites as no degree is conferred
in absentia.

16.7

No graduate shall be issued a Diploma and a Transcript of
Records unless he/she has been cleared of all accountabilities.

TITLE 6
S T UD E NT A F FA I R S A ND S E RVICE S
Section 1. The University exists principally to serve its students. Therefore, it
continues to strengthen its capability to extend increasingly better services
for their information, assistance, and well-being from the time they are
admitted up to their eventual involvement in society.
Section 2. It is incumbent upon the University to provide accessibility to all
its buildings and facilities for differently-abled members of the community.
Section 3. The University offers the following specific Student Welfare
Services:
3.1

32

Admission and Student Record Services. The University
Registrar’s Office serves the students during admission and
enrollment, and during their entire residency. The Admission
Services Office selects the students admitted into the
University to ensure quality education. The Office of Student
Records Services provides technical services, such as the
preparation and issuance of transcript of records, certifications,
clearances, certificates of honorable dismissal, and diplomas,
and the evaluation and maintenance of student records.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

3.2

Scholarship and Financial Assistance Services. The University,
through this office, provides scholarships and financial
assistance to qualified and deserving students.

3.3

Guidance, Counseling and Testing Services. The Office
of the Counseling and Psychological Services (OCPS)
provides a broad spectrum of counseling and psychological
services designed to assist students in optimizing their
creative energies and in achieving more effective personal,
social, educational and vocational development. It offers
the following services: academic advising and career
counseling, group counseling, life planning, peer counseling,
mini-workshops, trainer’s training, psychological testing
and personality evaluation. Pursuant to Section 24 (Mental
Health Promotion in Educational Institutions) and Section
26 (Mental Health Promotion and Policies in the Workplace),
Chapter 5 of Republic Act No. 11036, otherwise known as
the Mental Health Act, OCPS together with the University
Mental Health Committee ensure that the University adheres
with the Law and that necessary programs and services be
provided to raise awareness on mental health issues, identify
and provide support and services for individuals at risk, and
facilitate access, including referral mechanisms of individual
with mental health conditions to treatment and psychosocial
support.

3.4

Health Services. Medical and dental clinics are found in the
different branches/satellite campuses to provide primary
health care services to the PUP Community and its environs
placing emphasis on preventive medicine which includes
health education, disease prevention, initial evaluation/
assessment and treatment of illness. The following are
the primary health care services: (a) medical and dental
consultation and treatment of patients; (b) referral of patients
who need secondary care to consultants of various specialties
and requires further evaluation to hospital; (c) emergency
services with emergency response vehicle/transportation; (d)
annual medical and dental examination for university staff;
(e) medical and dental assistance for bloodletting, sports fest
or other similar activities inside and outside the university,
outreach programs for branches/satellite campuses without
physicians and dentists; and (f) issuance of medical and
dental clearance and certificate.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

33

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3.5

Food Services. Canteens and food stalls are available in the
different branches/satellite campuses of the University.

3.6

Student Housing Services. There are hostels, athletes’
quarters, and boarding houses within and proximate to
the University where students, faculty members, and nonteaching personnel can be accommodated.

3.7

Alumni Relations and Career Development Services. The
Alumni Relations and Career Development Office (ARCDO)
assists graduates of the University in obtaining employment
and supplies client companies with lists of highly qualified,
dependable and competent employees.

3.8

Religious Services. The Campus Ministry is the lead unit in
many religious activities inside and outside the campus. It
also serves as coordinator for the various activities of the
different religious organizations or groups in the campus. All
religious activities within the campus, except those, which
form part of official programs sponsored by the University
or any of its units, shall be under the sponsorship of an
accredited student organization or a faculty/administrative
staff group in coordination with the Campus Ministry. The
University encourages ecumenism in the campus. The
interfaith character of the University Chapel shall be
preserved and respected. Classrooms or any other facility of
the University shall not be used by any religious group without
written permission from the University authorities concerned.
Student religious groups shall comply with existing rules and
regulations, as well as those that may be promulgated from
time to time by the Office of the Director for Student Services
(ODSS).

3.9

Library and Related Services. The University has a Main
Library, the Ninoy Aquino Library and Learning Resources
Center (NALLRC), located inside the Mabini Campus, Sta.
Mesa, Manila. Satellite libraries are maintained in other
branches and campuses. The Main Library provides technical
assistance to the libraries in the branches/satellite campuses,
extension campuses, and reading centers in the different
colleges in the Main Campus.
a.

34

The Main Library Reader’s Services operates
the Circulation, Filipiniana, Serials and Special

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Collections Sections. The Serials Section offers
the following services: education in the news;
index to Philippine newspapers, newspaper
clippings, and culture and the arts updates.

3.10

b.

The Main Library has a Multi-Media Research
Center, Archives and Museum. The Multi-Media
Research Center provides multi-media services
for researchers. The archives contain historical
documents on the development of the University
as well as relevant documents generated by
various components of the University. The
Museum also contains some local and national
heritage items, memorabilia of PUP Presidents,
faculty and administrative personnel and
Centennial Memorabilia.

c.

The Main Library likewise operates a MultiMedia Service Department which provides the
PUP Community with audio-visual services
and resources for their media instructions and
other related activities. It also provides venues
for various activities. These venues include the
Bulwagang Balagtas, Bulwagang Bonifacio, and
Film Center.

d.

The Library has a Manual of Operations that
details the operations of the Ninoy Aquino Library
and Learning Resources Center (NALLRC) and
its satellite libraries. Likewise, it has a Library
Handbook which contains vital information
about its resources, services, facilities, personnel
and policies on the use of the library.

Cultural/Artistic Programs and Activities. Through the
University Center for Culture and the Arts (UCCA), the University
generates interest and participation in cultural/artistic activities
by designing workshops, giving lectures, staging plays,
performing in school celebrations, joining national competitions,
presenting exhibits and concerts, and showing cultural films.
It supervises the Polysound Band, Maharlika Dance Artists,
Sining-Lahi Polyrepertory, Bagong Himig Serenata, PUPil (PUP
Isko/IskaLitratista), Harana String Company, Buklod Sining,
and PUP Icons. The UCCA also coordinates with all cultural

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

35

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

groups in the branches and satellite campuses. Below are the
guidelines and procedures in the conduct of Cultural and/or
Artistic programs and activities.

36

3.10.1

Every proposed cultural program/activity shall be in
pursuit of the objectives of the University.

3.10.2

Every cultural program/activity to be held in the
University shall have prior clearance from the
Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs and
Services (OVPSAS).

3.10.3

In case the cultural activity is to be conducted by the
University cultural groups off-campus, a clearance
shall be secured from the Office of the President.

3.10.4

Any bonafide faculty, administrative employee,
or student organization that desires to present a
cultural program/activity shall submit the following
to the OVPSAS thru the University Center for Culture
and the Arts (UCCA): letter of request, program
proposal, production people, budget breakdown,
source of funding.

3.10.5

The letter of request shall state the title and brief
description of the activity, objective/s, inclusive
date and time, venue of the presentation, and
other pertinent information. It must also bear the
signature of the authorized representative and the
endorsing/approving head of office or adviser.

3.10.6

The UCCA shall act upon the letter of request.
It shall make the necessary recommendation
to the OVPSAS and shall inform the requesting
organization if the activity is approved or not.

3.10.7

The project proponents shall inform the UCCA of
intended changes in the project within two days
prior to its presentation. One week after the activity,
they shall submit the following for documentation/
records purposes: (a) three (3) copies of the
actual program; (b) at least one (1) picture of the
presentation; (c) press releases, newspaper reports

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

about the activity, if any; and (d) financial report (in
case of fund-raising project).
3.11 Other services
a.

Information and Communication Technology Office
(ICTO). This is the University’s lead office in the planning
and execution of ICT programs and projects. It manages
the University’s IT and communication network,
develops and maintains information systems, promotes
the use of ICT services and technologies among users in
the University through the conduct of trainings and other
IT educational activities, and through its Innovations
Laboratory, and conducts R&D activities to contribute to
the advancement and growth of the country’s IT industry.

b.

Physical Education and Sports Development. The PUP
has a strong physical education and sports development
program. Its sports facilities include a spacious trackand-field oval, a gymnasium, an Olympic-size swimming
pool, and courts/facilities for various sports and P.E.
buildings. It encourages its students to try out for inclusion
in its various varsity teams (basketball, volleyball, soccer,
softball, baseball, lawn tennis, table tennis, swimming,
track and field, archery, judo, karate, arnis, gymnastics,
chess, developmental sports, etc. It expects its students
to get actively involved in intramurals, extramurals and
sports competitions.

c.

Facilities and Amenities. The different theaters,
conference halls and function rooms in the University
may be used for conferences, meetings, seminars,
workshops, trainings and the like; their use, however,
is subject to the prior approval by duly authorized
University officials. Other organizations and agencies
outside the University may use the facilities of the
institution for their activities by arrangement with the
Resource Generation Office and the Vice President for
Administration, subject to existing policies, rules and
regulations of the University.

d.

Student Mails. The service of distributing mails to
students is assigned to the Central Records, Mabini
Campus which regularly posts names of students who
have letters for delivery.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

37

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

38

e.

Variegated Services. Available in the Mabini Campus
and in other branches and campuses are several pay
telephones, photocopy machines, photo services,
parking, computer laboratory services, and Internet
shops.

f.

Legal Assistance. The University, through its Office of
the University Legal Counsel, assists students in need
of legal advice on issues relative to their stay in the
University. It also issues clearance to incoming freshmen
and graduating students.

g.

Research. The Office of the Vice President for Research,
Extension, and Development helps students who need to
conduct research on the University and its development
thrusts/research agenda.

h.

Center for Technology Transfer and Enterprise
Development. This Unit promotes entrepreneurial
spirit in the University and its target rural and urban
communities through the incubation and other similar
means of propagating product development and
innovation.

i.

Institute for Data and Statistical Analysis (IDSA).
This serves as the University’s facility for statistical
consultancy and processing of research data of faculty
members, students and staff of the University as well as
researchers from other institutions/organizations. It also
offers statistical training for internal and external clients.

j.

Intellectual Property Management Office (IPMO). The
Office is mandated to support the University’s agenda
of culture of invention and innovation by protecting its
intellectual assets through registration of industrial
designs and trademarks, patenting, and copyrighting of
works and inventions of the stakeholders.

k.

Institute of Human and Social Development (IHSD).
The Center for Indigenous People Studies, Center for
Human Rights, Center for Peace, Poverty Alleviation
and Community Development Studies, Center for
Environmental Studies, Center for Public Administration
and Governance Studies and Center for Labor and
Industrial Relations are the different centers under

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

IHSD that promote equality, awareness, sustainable
development and good governance.
l.

Institute for Science and Technology Research (ISTR).
The Center for Engineering and Technology Research,
Center for Life Sciences Research and Center for
Mathematics, Computing and Information Sciences
Research have been created under ISTR to undertake
relevant research and studies.

m. Communication Management Office (CMO). The Office
has several units ready to serve those who want to (a)
know more about the University and its various media
activities; (b) have student activities published in the daily
newspapers or announced over the radio or television;
(c) get in touch with various government agencies;
and (d) conduct seminars on student publications and
campus journalism.
n.

Community Relations Development Center (CRDC).
CRDC provides and assists in the convergence of
social development-oriented community relations and
extension efforts of PUP. The Office caters to the needs
of the stakeholders in the University through continuous
coordination and relationship-building and implements
activities that promote awareness and consciousness on
social responsibility and volunteerism, partnership and
network building with government and non-government
agencies, international and local funding agencies
and private corporations. It also manages Community
Development and Extension Programs through the
continuous tapping and deployment of various expertise
from the various disciplines of the University; resource
generation; and organizing exposures, immersions and
integration in the communities.

o.

Administrative Services. The Office of the Vice President
for Administration through the Facility Management
Office (FaMO) helps those who would like to reserve
certain rooms for activities and/or to use equipment like
chairs, tables, sound system, and the like for the conduct
of student-initiated projects.

p.

Finance Services. The Offices under the Office of
the Vice President for Finance (OVPF) attend to

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

39

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

students’ financial concerns relating to their stay in the
University. The Internal Audit Office issues forms and
evaluates all applications for fund-raising activities for
recommendation to and approval of the Fund-Raising
Board; registers receipts for collection of memberships
fees and tickets of approved fund-raising activities;
audits financial reports, signs clearances of students
applying for school credentials such as diploma,
transcript of records and honorable dismissal.

40

q.

Alumni Services. The University continues to show
increased concern for PUP graduates in order to enable
them to find their places in the world of work. The
University assists alumni who desire to form association/s
here and abroad. The Alumni Relations and Career
Development Office (ARCDO) closely coordinates with
the PUP Federation of Alumni Associations, Inc. which is
represented in the Board of Regents and forges linkages
with other agencies and corporations.

r.

Gender and Development Services. The Institute for
Gender and Development (I-GAD) is an office whose
main objective is to pursue gender mainstreaming
as a strategy to promote and fulfill human rights in
advocating gender equality and sensitivity in the
academe, research, extension, policies, programs, and
processes of the University, including its branches and
campuses, in order to uphold the welfare of the students
as well as the non-teaching personnel of PUP.

s.

Resource Generation Office. RGO supports the project
development thrust of the University and identifies
local sources of funds, and conceptualizes sustainable
resource generation activities.

t.

Internal Audit Office – Internal Audit is a component of the
internal control system that provides   the University with
objective and independent assurance and consultative
service. It aims to support the University by achieving
the objectives and make informed decisions through
proactive risk management and thereafter strengthening
each unit inclined with the policies established and by
assessing the levels of the performance against the
agreed measures, targets and objectives.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Section 4. Student Affairs
a. Student Government and Student Organizations. Every
PUP student is a member of the Sentral na Konseho
ng Mag-aaral (SKM) and the College Student Council,
depending on his/her major area. The Student Affairs
Section (SAS) collaborates with SKM in the accreditation
of student organizations, as well as in the proper
disbursement and accounting of funds, settling of the
problems in the various student organizations, conduct
of the SKM election, selection of delegates to different
conferences and similar activities inside and outside of
the University.
b. Student Publications. The University, through the
Student Publications Office (SPO), coordinates all
publications undertaken by PUP students. Specifically,
the SPO shall have a continuing program to upgrade the
skills of student writers and journalists. This office shall
consult with the adviser/s and the Board of Examiners
to help determine the composition of the staff of the
major student publications, such as The Catalyst, and
the official publications of all colleges in the Main
Campus and extensions as well as in the branches and
satellite campuses. The SPO regularly extends technical
assistance and other publication services as may be
requested by student publications in the University.
c. Cultural and artistic activities initiated and organized by
the students and student groups/organizations shall be
in coordination with the UCCA.

TITLE 7
S T UDEN T CO U NCI L S , S T U D E NT O R GA NIZ ATIONS , AND
S T UDENT CO NS T I T U T I O NA L CO MMIS S IONS
Section 1. The University recognizes the right of students to organize and
develop responsible leadership. Thus, it encourages students to form, join
and participate in accredited/revalidated student organizations, clubs,
associations, societies, or any other student group that will suit the legitimate
needs, aspirations and interests of the students.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

41

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

Section 2. All organizations, clubs, associations, societies and any other
student group shall be governed by the University Code and the Rules and
Regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
Section 3. The Official Union of the students of the Polytechnic University of
the Philippines shall be known as the PUP Student Council or the Sentral na
Konseho ng Mag-aaral (SKM).
The Official Federation of all existing Student Councils in PUP System is the
Alyansa ng Nagkakaisang Konseho ng PUP (ANAK-PUP). The President of
ANAK-PUP shall be the student representative in the PUP Board of Regents
(BOR).
Section 4. The PUP Student Council known as Sentral na Konseho ng Magaaral (SKM) recognizes the existence of independent Student Constitutional
Commissions to execute tasks set for them. These are the Student Council
Commission on Audit (SC COA), Student Council Commission on Elections
(SC COMELEC), Student Council Commission on Student Organizations and
Accreditation (SC COSOA), and Student Council Student Tribunal (SCST).
Section 5. The Student Affairs Section (SAS) of the Office of the Director of
Student Services (ODSS) and the Sentral na Konseho ng Mag-aaral (SKM),
in cooperation with the Office of the Student Regent, shall coordinate the
operations and activities of the College Student Councils and student
organizations, clubs, associations, etc.
Section 6. New student organizations seeking accreditation may apply
within 45 days after the start of the first semester. They shall submit to the
SKM through the Commission of Student Organizations and Accreditations
(COSOA) the following:

42

6.1

three copies of its constitution and by-laws;

6.2

names of at least 15 of its officers and members who must be
bonafide students of the University;

6.3

one-year plan of activities;

6.4

financial clearance from the Internal Audit Office (IAO);

6.5

(a) [if] for college-based organization, clearance/certification
from the College Student Council; and (b) for University-wide
organization, clearance/certification from the Sentral na
Konseho ng Mag-aaral;

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

6.6

certification/clearance from the Student Council Commission
on Audit (SC COA); and,

6.7

name of the faculty adviser who is not an honorary or
alumni member of the said organization and proof of his/her
concurrence thereto.

Section 7. The SKM, through COSOA and in close coordination with SAS,
shall deliberate on the application and shall determine whether or not the
constitution and by-laws and the plan of activities are in accordance with
the University policies and/or other rules as may be promulgated by the
ODSS through SAS, and as duly approved by the Vice President for Student
Affairs and Services.
Section 8. Accredited student organizations shall apply for revalidation
within the period set by the COSOA but not later than 45 days from the start
of the first semester. Each shall submit to the SKM thru the COSOA the
following documents:
8.1

annual report of their accomplishments and activities of the
previous year and on-going projects (shall include, if any,
attendance to leadership trainings/seminars and meetings
initiated by SAS and COSOA);

8.2

statement of financial condition showing income and
expenditures, assets and liabilities (subject to prior clearance
from the Internal Audit Office);

8.3

copy of new constitution with emphasis on amended
provisions, if any, approved by the majority of the
organization’s membership;

8.4

list of new set of officers and photocopies of their registration
cards and an initial list of members;

8.5

plan of activities;

8.6

(a) for college-based organization, clearance/certification
from the College Student Council; and (b) for university-wide
organization, clearance from the Sentral na Konseho ng Magaaral;

8.7

certification/clearance from the Student Council Commission
on Audit; and

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

43

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

8.8

name of the faculty adviser who is not an honorary or alumni
member of the said organization and proof of his concurrence
thereto.

Section 9. Final approval of accreditation of newly-organized student
organizations and revalidation of previously accredited organizations shall
be done by the COSOA, subject to the review of the Chief of SAS and the
Director of OSS in close coordination with the Office of the University Legal
Counsel.
Section 10. University-wide new or old student organizations or clubs that
are constituted, organized, and supervised by a certain office or unit of the
University shall be exempted from being accredited or revalidated by the
SC COSOA. However, this exempted student organization shall furnish the
ODSS with the required documents at the beginning of each school year. The
conduct of its activities shall be in accordance with the University policies.
Section 11. All fund-raising activities undertaken by student organizations
shall be duly approved by the Fund-Raising Board of the University and
must comply with the guidelines issued by the University President.
Section 12. The student organizations shall be supervised as follows:

44

12.1

The SAS or the IAO shall require each student organization
to submit its financial statement with the attached necessary
supporting receipts/documents within thirty (30) days after
any activity and a copy shall be furnished to the SC COA.
The IAO may also cause the audit of the finances of a student
organization anytime during the year.

12.2

The SAS and COSOA shall be notified of all the activities of a
student organization for proper guidance and coordination. In
case of initiation rites or practices that do not constitute hazing
as defined under Republic Act Number 11053, the organization
shall file to the COSOA a written application under oath to
conduct such activity not later than seven (7) days prior to
the scheduled initiation date. The said written application shall
indicate the place and date of the initiation rites, the names
of the incumbent officers of the organization, any person or
persons who will take charge in the conduct of the rite, the
name of the recruits, neophytes, or applicants to be initiated,
and the manner by which they will conduct the activity. It
shall contain an undertaking that no harm of any kind shall be
committed by anybody during the rites.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

12.3

Accredited organizations shall be entitled to use the facilities
of the University. However, University functions and activities
shall take precedence over any student activities.

12.4

The SAS, SKM and COSOA shall be officially and promptly
notified of any change in the set of officers of a student
organization.

12.5

Posters and notices shall be approved by the ODSS and shall
be posted only on freedom boards or in other locations as may
be duly authorized by the University administration from time
to time. The sources/proponents should be identified in the
posters/notices. The University has the right to remove all
illegally posted notices or posters without prejudice to holding
the proponents/sources answerable in case of complaints.

Section 13. Accredited student organizations shall observe the following
rules and guidelines:
13.1

Only duly accredited and revalidated student organizations
shall collect membership fees/dues on voluntary basis (except
those which were approved by the BOR), initiate incomegenerating projects and fund-raising activities, and have
access to University facilities.

13.2

Collection of membership fees shall be voluntary and not part
of the enrollment procedures. Neither shall organization shirts
and pins, and other payments nor purchases be deemed part
of the enrollment procedures of the University.

13.3

Membership fee shall not be more than Fifty (50) Pesos per
semester.

13.4

Any increase in the current membership fee shall be approved
by the general members of the organization, to be confirmed
by the COSOA and the College Student Council and/or Sentral
na Konseho ng Mag-aaral and shall be duly recommended to
the ODSS through the SAS.

13.5

An official receipt, approved and pre-numbered by the Internal
Audit Office, shall be issued to the students who pay the
membership fees and/or dues. The total membership of the
organization shall be reported by the President and Secretary

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

45

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

of the organization to the COSOA and to the University Internal
Audit Office.

46

13.6

Any fund-raising activity such as sale of T-shirts, pins, holding
of concerts, raffles, and the like shall follow the existing
University guidelines thru the Office of the Internal Audit (OIA)
and duly approved by the Fund-Raising Board.

13.7

Student organizations are required to open an account in
any government depository bank if the membership fees
accumulate the minimum amount of Php 20,000.00 for every
semester.

13.8

Only the organization’s president or treasurer shall be the cosignatory of any savings account or withdrawal slip drawn
against the said bank account. The other co-signatory shall
be the College Dean / Campus or Branch Director or any
regular faculty member of the College / Campus or Branch
approved by the Dean / Director. The regular faculty member
as co-signatory shall be officially endorsed by the organization.
The University Internal Audit Office, COSOA, SCCOA, and
SKM shall be furnished a copy of the endorsement. In case
of University-wide organizations, the Director of the Student
Services shall be the co-signatory.

13.9

Student councils, organizations, and publications are required
to submit financial statements to the Office of the Internal
Audit every semester.

13.10

Student organizations, publications, and councils may or
may not have any faculty adviser. In case there is, only fulltime faculty members can be assigned and he/she must be
endorsed by the organization’s officers.

13.11

Faculty advisers are not allowed to oversee more than one
student organization.

13.12

Resolutions to withdraw funds shall be signed by the majority
of the officers prior to any fund withdrawal.

13.13

The officers of student organizations, publications, or councils
with financial liabilities to the University as confirmed by the
Office of the Internal Audit shall pay the exact amount of the
said liabilities to the Fund Management Office (University

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Cashier). In case of organizations whose immediate past
officers are liable, the present officers may file a case against
the former to the Office of the University Legal Counsel.
In instances where the financial obligation is owed to student
organization, the remittance required shall be given directly to
the authorized officers of the said organization.
Section 14. All student election-related matters shall be dealt with strictly
in accordance with the rules and regulations, and procedures prescribed
and promulgated by the duly constituted Student Council Commission
on Elections (SC COMELEC). No election protest, complaint, or appeal
relative to any election-related matters shall be filed before the University,
its administration and/or any of its department or office.

TITLE 8
CA M P U S P U B L I CAT I O NS
Section 1. The following shall be the basic policies on student publications
of the University.
1.1

The University recognizes and upholds the right of its students
to the free expression of ideas as embodied in the Constitution
of the Republic of the Philippines.

1.2

The University encourages its students from different
departments, colleges, branches, and satellite campuses to
undertake quality publications for disseminating information,
creative ideas, results of research, opinions, and constructive
criticisms designed to broaden and advance the frontiers of
knowledge and intellectual pursuit.

1.3

The University adheres to the universal concept that the
exercise of the freedom of the press is a public trust that should
never be used for unlawful, anti-social or divisive purposes.

1.4

The University also recognizes the vital role of the student
press as medium of learning and constructive instrument for
the attainment of the University and national goals.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

47

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

Section 2. All student publications shall strive to:
2.1

represent and advance the general interests, ideals,
aspirations, and sentiments of their respective clientele, as
well as that of the other members of the University;

2.2

stimulate responsible advocacy and healthy exchange of ideas,
and foster understanding and goodwill inside and outside the
University;

2.3

serve as fora for free expression and dissemination of news and
views, which are of interest to the PUP academic community
and to society-at-large;

2.4

promote intellectual excellence; and

2.5

bring out the truth.

Section 3. Student publications shall be monitored by the ODSS through the
Student Publications Office (SPO), which shall propose, from time to time,
pertinent rules and regulations for the efficient and effective management of
each publication.
Section 4. Student publications shall cover all printed matters, such as
newspapers, magazines, yearbooks, journals, newsletters, pamphlets, and
the like produced by the students of the University primarily for their clientele.
Section 5. Students may have their own newspapers and annuals in PUP
Main Campus and in the different branches and satellite campuses of the
University.

48

5.1

The Catalyst shall be the official student newspaper of the
Polytechnic University of the Philippines. As such, it shall
observe the policies and guidelines on campus publications.
Specific rules and regulations regarding its management and
production are contained in The Catalyst Guidelines. It shall
be funded by the college students of PUP Main Campus.

5.2

The Memorabilia shall be the official yearbook of the graduating
students of PUP. It shall be funded by subscriptions paid
by graduating students, and shall observe specific policies
contained in the Memorabilia Guidelines.

5.3

The PUP Laboratory High School, colleges/institutes and
other academic units in the main campus and the different

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

branches and satellite campuses of the University may also
have their official student publications, and the frequency of
publishing shall depend on their respective funds. Moreover,
taking into consideration their respective situations, these
student publications may adopt the guidelines governing the
Catalyst, or such rules as the University may promulgate.
Section 6. The adviser/s of the official student publication and other approved
college/ branch/campus publication shall be appointed by the University
President through the Vice President for Student Affairs and Services, upon
the recommendation of the editorial board and endorsement of the Director
of Student Services.
Section 7. The selection of the staffers of the official student publication and
other approved college/ branch/campus shall be in accordance with the
editorial guidelines and policies set by the University through the Student
Publications Office.
Section 8. Any college or organization desiring to print its own student
publication shall submit a request for accreditation to the ODSS through
the Student Publications Office. The College or organization shall apply for
accreditation within the first semester.
8.1

The publisher of each student publication shall be the
sponsoring organization as a whole and shall assume all
responsibilities that devolve upon it.

8.2

The staffers and adviser(s) of each student publication shall be
chosen in accordance with rules and procedures promulgated
by the sponsoring group and approved by the ODSS upon the
recommendation of the Student Publications Office.

8.3. Request for accreditation shall contain the following information:
8.3.1		
proposed name of the publication;
8.3.2
name of the sponsoring group;
8.3.3
specific purpose/s of the publication;
8.3.4
proposed composition of the editorial staff 			
including staffers’ names;
8.3.5
name/s of proposed adviser/s (should be a 			
regular faculty member or permanent employee of the 		
University);
8.3.6
complete specifications of the publication;
8.3.7		
editorial policies of the publications;
8.3.8
proposed budgetary outlay; and
8.3.9
fund-control system.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

49

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

Section 9. Funds collected directly by students through fund-raising
activities earmarked specifically for publication shall be managed by the
student groups concerned, subject to the accounting and auditing rules as
prescribed by the Internal Audit Office.

TITLE 9
CO D E O F D I S C I P L I NE
Section 1. Student offenses shall be subjected to disciplinary measures
by the University. If the sanction imposed is suspension or dismissal, the
student shall not be allowed to enter the University premises.
Section 2. All complaints involving students shall be referred to the Office of
the Student Services.
Section 3. The grounds for disciplinary action and the corresponding
sanctions/penalties are as follows:
3.1 Not having the ID validated
Old students (Second to Fifth Year students) shall have their IDs
validated by the Office of the Dean or Office of the Branches/
Campuses Director until the last day of the adjustment period of
every semester. In case of failure to secure validated ID, the student
shall be meted with the following penalty:
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – The student shall be given a warning slip by the
Student Affairs Section of OSS. The student’s
parent/guardian shall be informed about the
offense committed by the student.
2nd Offense – one (1) week suspension
3rd Offense – two (2) weeks suspension
More than three (3) Offenses – one (1) month suspension
3.2

Not wearing ID
No student shall be allowed to enter the University premises
without ID or registration card (RC). In case of lost ID or
Registration Card (RC), the student shall secure a temporary
visitor’s pass and shall immediately request for a Student’s

50

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Entry Slip (SES) from the Office of the Director of the Student
Services. The SES shall be valid for three (3) days only.
Students who requested or was issued SES for three (3)
instances in one semester shall be meted with a penalty of
one-week suspension.
Students caught not wearing ID or without SES shall be meted
with the following penalty:
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – The student shall be given a warning slip
by the Student Affairs Section of OSS. The
student’s parent/guardian shall be informed
about the offense committed by the student.
2nd Offense – one-week suspension
3rd Offense – two-week suspension
More than three (3) Offenses – one-month suspension
3.3

Loss of ID / Registration Card
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – warning and payment for the cost of printing
of new ID
2nd Offense – warning and requiring of 16-hour studentassistance service to be rendered within 5
school days upon report of loss, on top of
payment for the cost of ID printing.
For more than two (2) offenses – requiring 24-hour
student-assistance service to be rendered
within 7 schooldays upon report of loss, on
top of the payment for the cost of ID printing.
In all instances, submission of notarized affidavit attesting
to the reason of the loss shall be required. Notarization of
Affidavit of Loss for lost ID card shall be rendered as free
service of the University.

3.4

Using fake, another person’s ID, or lending one’s ID for use of
another person
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – one-month suspension
2nd Offense – one-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

51

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3.5

Failure to secure an ID on time, or late filing of application for
ID Freshmen and transferees shall secure ID upon registration.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – The student shall be given a warning slip
by the Student Affairs Section of OSS. The
student’s parent/guardian shall be informed
about the offense committed by the student.
2nd Offense – one-week suspension
3rd Offense – two-week suspension
More than three (3) Offenses – one-month suspension

3.6

Wearing of inappropriate attire or violation of Title 4, Section 5.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – three (3) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – six (6) hours of campus service
3rd Offense – two-day suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – one-month
suspension

3.7

Overnight stay in any University property shall be strictly
regulated. In case of unauthorized stay in the campus, the
following sanctions shall be imposed.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – Dismissal from the
University

3.8

Unauthorized use of name, logo and seal of the University in
printed programs, invitations, announcements, tickets, and
the like
In addition to other penalties for whatever damages the
University may incur, the following sanctions shall be imposed
to the erring student.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense –Three (3) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
3rd Offense – Two-day suspension

52

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

4th and subsequent similar offense – One (1)-month
suspension
3.9 Use of the University facilities shall be in accordance with the
existing policies
In addition to other penalties for whatever damages the University
may incur, the following sanctions shall be imposed to the erring
student.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – Dismissal from the
University
3.10

Unofficial or unauthorized participation in any off-campus
activity
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – One-week suspension
3rd Offense – One-month suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – One-semester
suspension

3.11

Unauthorized release to the press or similar channels of public
communication notices and other announcements about or
on behalf of the University
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Two-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense –One-semester suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – Dismissal from the
University

3.12

Unauthorized entry of visitors/guests invited by students/
organizations (e.g. lecturers, speakers, seminar participants,
viewers of exhibits, and the like)
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – One-week suspension

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

53

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3rd Offense – One-month suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – One-semester
suspension
3.13		

Illegal posting of bills, posters, tarpaulins and the like
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – One-week suspension
3rd Offense – One-month suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – One-semester
suspension

3.14

Littering
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
2nd Offense – One-day campus service
3rd Offense – One-week campus service
4th and subsequent similar offense – One-month campus
service

3.15

Smoking (Including vape/e-cigarette)
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th and subsequent similar offense – Dismissal from the
University

3.16

Entering or being in school premises while intoxicated, bringing
in and/or in possession of liquor and other intoxicating drinks
in the University premises
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.17

54

Gambling, betting or similar engagement in any game of
chance within the school premises

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th Offense – Dismissal from the University
3.18

Use of internet/IT facilities within the campus for gaming,
pornography, cyber bullying and the like
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.19

Theft
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.20

Vandalism and defacing the University property and/or any
member of the PUP community
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.21

Destruction and other intentional damage to University
property, or of a person’s property.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University
In addition to the above sanctions, a fine equivalent to
the value of the property destroyed/damaged shall be
imposed.

3.22

Deliberate disruption of classes, academic function, official
meeting or school activity which tends to create disorder or
disturbance

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

55

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension
2nd Offense – One-month suspension
3rd Offense – One-semester suspension
4th Offense – Dismissal from the University
3.23

Gross acts of disrespect, in word or in deed, which tend to
put any member of the faculty, administration or non-teaching
staff in ridicule or contempt
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.24

Public and malicious accusation which causes dishonor,
discredit, or contempt of the University or any of its office or
harm its good reputation
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-semester suspension
2nd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.25

Direct or indirect assault upon the person or any member of
the University academic community.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.26

Scandalous display of affection
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Six (6) hours of campus service
2nd Offense –One-day campus service
3rd Offense – One-week campus service
4th and subsequent similar offense – One-month campus
service

3.27

Brawls on campus or at off-campus school functions.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension

56

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.28

Tampering with, falsifying or causing the falsification of
any official document like registration certificate, transcript
of records, identification cards, certifications, and other
documents of similar nature or purpose.
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.29

Submission of falsified documents for admission
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
If discovered prior to admission – Non-admission
If discovered after admission – Suspension, Dismissal,
or Revocation of degree depending on the gravity of
offense

3.30

Dishonesty, such as cheating during any examination, quiz or
test, and plagiarism in connection with any academic work
, the following acts shall constitute cheating and shall be
punishable:
3.30.1

unauthorized possession of notes or any material
relative to the examination, particularly when those
are actually used;

3.30.2

copying from another’s examination papers or
allowing another to copy from one’s examination
papers;

3.30.3

having somebody else take the examination for him/
her (in whichever case both shall be liable); and

3.30.4

passing off another’s work as if it is one’s own work—
any assigned report, term paper, case analysis,
reaction paper, and the like copied from another.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

57

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – Failing grade in the examination/quiz
concerned
2nd Offense – Failing grade in the concerned course
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University
3.31

Carrying of deadly weapons such as firearms, explosives, ice
picks, knives, and the like within the University premises
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
– Dismissal and filing of criminal case

3.32

Possession or use of prohibited drugs, such as LSD, marijuana,
heroin, shabu or opiate of any kind
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
(See Title 10 Section 3.6) – Drug Abuse Policy

3.33

All forms of bullying and/or harassment, threat and intimidation
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-month suspension
2nd Offense – One-semester suspension
3rd Offense – Dismissal from the University

3.34

Filing of a false or inaccurate application form for the conduct
of an initiation rite which does not constitute hazing
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension of the incumbent
officers and all members who participated
in the unauthorized rite
2nd Offense – Two-week suspension of the incumbent
officers and all members who participated
in the unauthorized rite
3rd Offense – Dismissal

3.35 Holding of an initiation rite which does not constitute hazing
without approval from the University
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
1st Offense – One-week suspension of the incumbent
officers and all members who
participated in the unauthorized rite

58

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

2nd Offense – Two-week suspension of the incumbent
officers and all members who
participated in the unauthorized rite.
3rd Offense – Dismissal
3.36

Holding of an initiation which constitutes hazing
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
(a) Expulsion of all incumbent officers, all members present
during the hazing, members who has actual knowledge of
hazing, and all members who participated in the planning of
hazing; and (b) revocation of the registration of the organization

3.37

Sexual Harassment complaints including catcalls, sexuallyexplicit comments, sexist remarks and homophobic insult shall
be referred to the Committee on Decorum and Investigation
(CODI)
DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS
(See Title 11 Section 2.9) – Procedures for the Settlement of
Complaints/Grievances

Section 3. The above-mentioned sanctions shall be without prejudice to
filing an appropriate criminal or civil case against the erring student.
Section 4. Cases falling under 3.1-3.10, 3.12-3.15 shall be handled by the ODSS.
All other cases shall be referred by the ODSS to the Student Disciplinary
Board. Sections 3.28 and 3.29 shall be referred to the University Legal
Counsel Office, subject to the approval of the Vice President for Student
Affairs and Services.
Section 5. The ODSS shall be the central repository of all records relating
to student disciplinary cases, except cases handled by the Committee on
Decorum and Investigation (CODI), and the University Legal Counsel Office.
Section 6. All offenses shall be reported to the parent/s or guardian/s of
the offender through the Guidance, Counseling and Testing Services Office.
Due process shall be observed by the University through its authorized
representative/s.
Section 7. Appropriate disciplinary sanctions for non-observance of
the University Rules or other infractions not covered by Title 9 shall be
recommended by the Student Disciplinary Board (SDB) to be submitted
to the Vice President for Student Affairs and Services before the final
endorsement to the University President, subject to the provisions of Title 11,
Section 2.6 of this Handboo
The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

59

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

TITLE 10
DRUG ABUSE POLICY
Section 1. Policy Statement
1.1 In keeping with the dangerous drug abuse prevention
program of the national government, the Philippine National
Police (PNP), Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA)
or any authorized law enforcement agency may carry out any
legitimate drug-abuse prevention activities/programs within
the University premises, provided that the conduct thereof is
properly coordinated and approved by PUP.
1.2 The conduct of random drug testing of students is mandatory
pursuant to Section 36(c) of R.A. 9165. The random drug
testing under Dangerous Drug Board (DDB) Regulation
No. 6, s. 2003 and No. 3, s. 2009 shall ensure that such is
implemented for drug prevention and rehabilitation purposes
and shall guarantee and respect the personal privacy and
dignity of the students. The drug test result shall be treated
with utmost confidentiality and cannot be used in any criminal
proceedings.
Section 2. Scope and Coverage
1.1 This Policy shall cover all student-applicants, currently
enrolled students and returnees and transferees in all the
colleges, branches and campuses of the University. The
conduct of drug testing of students in the University shall
comply with the parameters and limitations laid down by the
Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002 (Republic Act
No. 9165) and its Implementing Rules and Regulations, as well
as the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB) Regulation No. 6, Series
of 2003, as amended by DDB Regulation No. 3, Series of 2009.
Section 3. Conduct of the Random Drug Testing
3.1 Coverage of the Students to be Tested
3.1.1 All currently enrolled students shall be covered by
mandatory random drug testing.
3.1.2 sampling design shall be prepared by the Institute for
Data and Statistical Analysis (IDSA).
3.1.3 The number and location of students to be tested
shall be based on a Multi-stage Sampling of all
currently enrolled students, with the sampling
population yielding a statistical 95% confidence level
for the whole student population.

60

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

3.1.4

The Drug Test Result from any DOH accredited
drug facility shall be an admission requirement for
all incoming freshmen students. Drug Test result
must remain sealed and signed by authorized
representative of a DOH-accredited drug facility,
physician or private medical practitioners duly
accredited to administer drug testing.

3.2 General Preparations
3.2.1 This Guideline shall be made available in the PUP
Website.
3.2.2 The Committee shall supervise the overall
implementation of the random drug testing in all the
branches and campuses of the University.
3.2.3 All parents shall be notified through their son’s/
daughter’s Student Information System prior to
enrolment of the purpose and manner by which the
random drug testing shall be conducted. For student
applicants (incoming freshmen, transferee and
returnee), the notice shall be included in the list of
admission requirements.
3.2.4 The content of the notice shall be as follows:
NOTICE TO PARENTS
Please be informed that pursuant to CHED Memorandum
Order No. 18, series of 2018 and the University Anti-Drug Abuse
Policy, all currently enrolled students shall undergo the mandatory
random drug testing. The cost of the drug testing shall be borne by
the University. In case the confirmatory drug test yielded positive
results, PUP, is not barred from admitting the student, unless there is
a valid reason not to admit such student on grounds other than the
positive findings in the drug test. PUP guarantees full compliance
with the Data Privacy Act of 2012 and ensures that all records will be
strictly confidential and confirmed positive results shall not be a basis
for disciplinary action unless the student concerned is held liable for
violations of other University rules and regulations. Students found
to be drug dependent shall undergo appropriate intervention and/or
rehabilitation in accordance with the PUP Student Handbook.
		

With my conformity:
_________________________
Name and Signature of Parent

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

61

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3.2.5 Parents shall be required to sign the notice and
conformity to the mandatory random drug testing.
The acknowledgement receipt of the notice shall
be made a requirement before enrolment of the
students. For currently enrolled students, the
acknowledgement receipt signed by parent shall be
required before issuance of the registration card.
3.2.6 Failure by the parents and/or students to return the
acknowledgement receipt of the notice shall not be a
bar to the conduct of the drug testing and of the said
students’ inclusion in the sample.
3.2.7 The Committee, through the Office of the Vice
President for Academic Affairs (OVPAA) and Office
of the Vice President for Branches and Satellite
Campuses (OVPBC) shall conduct orientation of all
the Deans, Directors and Chairpersons relative to the
implementation of this Policy.
3.3 Selection of Samples
3.3.1 The Committee shall supervise the identification
of the students who will undergo the random drug
testing based on the approved sampling design.
3.3.2 The Committee shall ensure the confidentiality and
integrity of the random selection process. All the
members of the Committee including their staff shall
safeguard the confidentiality of the list of selected
students in keeping with the required randomness
as to time and place of testing.
3.3.3 Immediately after the end of the adjustment period,
the Information and Communication Technology
Office (ICTO) shall provide IDSA with the list of
students including the name of their college and
program. IDSA shall then conduct Multi-stage
Sampling and transmit to ICTO the list of selected
students. ICTO shall prepare the list of selected
students with the date and time of testing. The list
shall be transmitted to the Office of the Vice President
for Academic Affairs (OVPAA). The OVPAA/OVPBC
shall inform concerned Dean/Director/Chairperson
of the selection of their student/s in the coverage of
the drug testing on the day of the actual drug testing.

62

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

3.4 Procedure for the Collection of Urine Samples and Testing for
Drugs
3.4.1 Only Department of Health (DOH)-accredited drug
facility or physician shall conduct the drug testing.
The mandatory random drug testing of students in
the PUP Main Campus shall be conducted by the
drug testing service provider in the vicinity of the
College of Law.
3.4.2 The collection of urine samples and the testing for
drugs shall strictly follow the guidelines and protocols
required by DOH.
3.4.3 Before proceeding with the specimen collection, the
students selected to undergo the drug testing shall
be given an orientation by the drug testing service
provider on the process of drug testing, their rights,
and the implications of the drug testing.
3.4.4 The students shall be requested to accomplish a drug
testing form to be provided by the Committee. The
form shall include information on any prescription
medicines, vitamins, and food supplements that they
have ingested within the past five (5) days.
3.4.5 Students who are already ready to give their urine
sample shall approach the specimen collectors’ table
and select the specimen bottle that he or she will use.
3.4.6 To safeguard the integrity of the urine sample, the
student will be accompanied by a specimen collector
of the same gender to the private collection area,
where the student will be asked to thoroughly wash
and dry his or her hands, empty pockets and remove
outer garments (jackets, etc.).
3.4.7 The collection of urine shall then be conducted. The
student shall submit the urine sample to the specimen
collector who shall examine, in the presence of the
student, whether the urine collected can be accepted
for testing.
3.4.8 If the urine sample is accepted, the student shall
affix his or her signature and the date and time of the
collection to the sealing tape. The specimen collector
shall then seal the specimen bottle in the presence of
the student.
3.4.9 The specimen collector and the student shall affix the
final signatures on the drug testing form to attest to
the regularity of the procedures done.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

63

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3.4.10 All the collected specimen shall be consolidated,
packed and transferred to the custody of the DOHaccredited drug examination facility for the testing
procedures, following the protocols of DOH for
proper storage, handling and transport.
3.4.11 All the necessary documentation shall be submitted
to the relevant offices as identified by the Committee.
3.5 Drug Test Results
3.5.1 All specimen submitted for examination shall have
a corresponding laboratory result issued within 15
days.
3.5.2 A positive screening result shall be subjected to
confirmatory analysis. The final report shall be based
on the confirmatory results.
3.5.3 Screening laboratory results shall bear the signatures
of the Analyst and the Head of the Laboratory.
Confirmatory laboratory results shall bear the
signatures of the Analyst, Chief Chemist and Head of
the Laboratory.
3.5.4 The names of all students who were tested negative
will be summarized in a result form, while the
laboratory results for specimens testing positive
in the confirmatory test shall be in individual result
forms.
3.5.5 The results shall be placed in a sealed envelope
and marked as confidential, and submitted for
transmission to the Medical Services. For LGUfunded campuses which have no physician, the
OCPS shall deploy registered guidance counselors
during enrolment to open the drug test result and
transmit result to the Medical Services.
3.5.6 The Medical Services shall keep record of all drug
testing results.
3.6 Action on Drug Test Results
3.6.1 The Medical Services/Physician on duty (for
LGU-funded campuses) shall inform the parents
and students of the result of the test and how the
information is regarded with utmost secrecy and
confidentiality.
3.6.2 Pending result of the confirmatory test, the Medical
Services shall notify the Admission Office of the

64

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

3.6.3

3.6.4

3.6.5

3.6.6

pendency of the laboratory result. The student
applicant shall be assured of the slot in course/
program applied for.
For students who were tested positive after
confirmatory test, Medical Services shall set a
conference with the student and parents and the
Office of Counseling and Psychological Services
(OCPS) to discuss issues of drug use and possible
dependency.
After the conference, the Director of Medical Services
or Physician on duty (for LGU-funded campuses) or
guidance counselor from OCPS shall refer the student
and his/ her parent to a government-owned DOHaccredited facility or DOH-accredited government
physician to determine the student’s dependency
level, at which the following shall be undertaken:
a. Drug dependency level of the student shall be
evaluated;
b. Cross reference of information shall be validated
from the parent;
c. Treatment planning for the student shall be
discussed and presented to the student and
parent; and
d. Options for treatment should be discussed with
the parent and student.
If a student is found to be a drug dependent, the
Medical Services shall refer him or her to the OCPS,
the Department of Social Welfare and Development
(DSWD) or a local social worker for counseling and
other interventions, at his/her option. The parent and
the student may also choose to enroll the student in
a private rehabilitation center or program or opt to
avail of the rehabilitation services of the government
through a DOH-accredited facility. If the parent and
student would opt for private services, appropriate
referrals will be done, taking note of the progress
of treatment on a regular basis. Trained guidance
counselors may also be utilized.
The student shall then undergo the prescribed
intervention program under the supervision of the
DOH-accredited facility or physician, or private
practitioners, or social worker, in consultation
with the parent. Such process of observation and
counseling shall be done in coordination with the
OCPS.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

65

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

3.6.7

If the student shows no signs of improvement or
recovery, or fails the drug test the second time, the
DOH-accredited facility or physician may make a
recommendation to the student, parent, and OCPS
to have the student referred to a DOH-accredited
facility suited to the student’s level of dependency. If
another drug testing is conducted for another period
on the same student population, and the student is
found positive the second time, the University shall
proceed in accordance with Section 61, R.A. 9165.
3.6.8 If the parents refuse to act, the University shall
proceed in accordance with Sec. 61 of RA 9165
(Compulsory Confinement of a Drug Dependent Who
Refuses to Apply Under the Voluntary Submission
Program).
3.6.9 Students and applicants who will be required to
undergo in-house intervention or voluntary and
compulsory confinement drug dependency shall file
a Leave of Absence and may be re-admitted after
completion of the intervention.
3.6.10 After intervention, the student shall submit clearance
from Physician and proof of completion of intervention
to the OCPS before re-admitted to the University.
The OCPS shall furnish the Medical Services and
Admission Office copy of said compliance.
3.6.11 Positive confirmatory drug test result under this
Policy shall not be a ground for expulsion or any
disciplinary action against the student and should not
be reflected in any and all academic records. Under
no circumstance shall the drug test results be used to
incriminate any student for further legal action which
may result to administrative /civil/ criminal liabilities.
3.6.12 Likewise, consistent with the requirements of
confidentiality, the results of drug tests conducted
shall not be used as evidence in any court or tribunal,
where the subject student stands to be accused of
any crime or felony, and for any other purpose.
3.7 Training of Guidance Counselors and Medical Personnel
3.7.1

66

PUP, in coordination with PDEA or other concerned
agencies, shall formulate and conduct training
programs for medical personnel, guidance counselors
and faculty of the Department of Psychology who

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

will take part in the implementation of this Policy, to
enhance their skills in handling drug dependency
cases and they shall be encouraged to undergo DOH
accreditation.
3.8 Enforcement of Compliance
3.8.1 The refusal to undergo testing shall not give rise to
a presumption of drug use or dependency; however,
students who refuse to undergo random drug testing
shall be reported by the Committee to the Student
Disciplinary Board (SDB) for appropriate action.
3.9 Subsequent Drug Testing
3.9.1

The timing of any subsequent drug testing of students
shall be determined by the Committee.

3.10 Fees
3.10.1 The fee for drug testing prior to admission will
be borne by the student-applicant. The studentapplicant may choose to be tested in any DOHaccredited drug facility or in the authorized facility of
the University.
3.10.2 The mandatory random drug-testing of all currently
enrolled students shall be borne by the University.
3.10.3 All fees relating to intervention of students who
are found to be drug-abuser shall be borne by the
student.
Section 4. Confidentiality
1.1 PUP shall guarantee the strict confidentiality and integrity of the
drug test results.
1.1.1 All records must strictly be held confidential as
provided for under the pertinent provisions of RA
9165. The University shall also ensure the provision
of non-discriminatory intervention services.
1.1.2 Pertinent provisions of R.A. No. 10173 otherwise
known as the “Data Privacy Act of 2012” and its
Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) shall
be observed, particularly Chapter III thereof, which
pertains to the “Processing of Personal Information”

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

67

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

to protect vital important interests of the data subject,
including his life and health.
Section 5. Sanctions
Any member of the faculty, administration, or employee of the
University who violates the rules of confidentiality of the conduct
and results of the drug tests shall, in addition to the sanctions
provided in the 2017 Rules on Administrative Cases in the Civil
Service, be liable under Section 72 of R.A No. 9165 and other
applicable law.
1.2 While positive confirmatory drug test result shall not be a ground
for any disciplinary action against the student, the unjustified
refusal of the student to undergo drug testing shall merit reprimand.
The student who still refuses to undergo random drug testing after
being reprimanded shall be refused enrolment/admission until he
complies with the policy.
1.1

TITLE 11
PROCEDURES FOR THE SETTLEMENT OF COMPLAINTS/
GRIEVANCES
Section 1. The procedure for the redress and settlement of complaints
and grievances in the University shall conform to the due process of law
to ensure the highest degree of fairness and justice to all concerned. To
the greatest extent, however, all concerned parties should seek all remedies
through counseling, arbitration and amicable settlement of conflicts. In
every case, the ultimate aim shall be the restoration of impaired human
dignity and, where necessary, restoration of material damages. Sanctions
and punishments shall be meted out sparingly, taking into consideration the
capacity of individuals to learn and profit from their mistakes.
Section 2. The procedure for disciplinary cases is as follows.
2.1

68

For any complaints/grievance by a student or against the
student, the aggrieved/concerned party must immediately
inform the Office of the Director of the Student Services or the
head of student services in the case of branches and satellite
campuses.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

2.2

The Office of the Director of the Student Services or the head of
student services in the case of branches and campuses must
attempt to settle all grievance/concerns through consultation
and dialogue with the concerned parties.

2.3

In all cases, the ODSS shall endorse the parties to the Office
of the Counseling and Psychological Services for intervention
and assessment of the psychological condition of the parties.

2.4

For cases that are settled amicably, the OCPS shall give
recommendation/assessment to the ODSS and in case of
failure to arrive at an amicable settlement, the ODSS shall refer
the case to the Student Disciplinary Board for appropriate
action. The ODSS shall forward the case record and the
assessment of the OCPS to the SDB.

2.5

Complaints, both disciplinary and non-disciplinary, must be
in writing signed by the complainant/s, and filed before the
Office of the Director of Student Services (ODSS).

2.6

Student Disciplinary Board (SDB)
a.

The Student Disciplinary Board (SDB) shall be
composed of two representatives from the student
sector, who shall be recommended by the SKM
President; one representative from the faculty, who
shall be recommended by the Faculty Federation;
one representative from the administrative
employees, who shall be recommended by the
Employees Union, and one representative from
the administration, who shall be designated by the
University President. Majority of its membership
shall constitute a quorum necessary for the
conduct of disciplinary proceedings. The presiding
officer shall be elected from among its members.
In the absence of the duly elected SKM President,
a student representative to the SDB and CODI
shall be recommended by the Student Regent.
In the absence of the duly elected SKM President
and Student Regent, a representative to the SDB
and CODI shall be recommended by the Director

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

69

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

of Student Services, and approved by the Vice
President for Student Affairs and Services.

70

b.

The Student Disciplinary Board is mandated to
submit to the President through the Vice President
for Student Affairs and Services a written
report of all the resolutions, findings, actions,
recommendations and proceedings undertaken in
the exercise of its adjudicatory functions.

c.

Upon receipt of the aforesaid referral, the SDB shall
require the complainant to submit a sworn affidavit
with proof of service to the respondent within
a period of five (5) calendar days from receipt of
the order. In the same directive, respondent will
be given a period of three (3) calendar days to
file counter-affidavit. Failure on the part of the
respondent to comply shall be deemed a waiver
thereof. Whenever necessary, reply to the answer
and rejoinder may be allowed. The proceedings
shall be summary in nature but with the view of
protecting the right of the parties to due process.

d.

All cases referred to the SDB shall be resolved
within ten (10) calendar days from submission for
resolution.

e.

In the resolution of cases, the SDB shall be guided
by the disciplinary sanctions provided under Title 9
hereof or recommend the same in accordance with
Section 4 of Title 9, taking into consideration the
justifying and mitigating circumstances attendant
in a case.

f.

The decision of the SDB involving complaints
where the penalty is lower than suspension of one
(1) month shall be final. For complaints where the
penalty is more than one (1) month suspension,
the SDB shall make the proper recommendation
to the Vice President for Student Affairs and
Services who shall render a decision based on
such recommendation.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Appeal – The decision of the Vice President for Student Affairs
and Services may be questioned by way of an appeal within
the period of ten (10) calendar days from receipt of the assailed
decision to the Office of the President, whose decision shall be
final and executory.
2.7

Cases initiated by student/s against faculty member or nonteaching personnel shall be referred by the ODSS to the
OVPAA, OVPA or OVPBC for appropriate action. The OVPAA,
OVPA, or OVPBC is required to furnish the ODSS copies of its
resolution/s, recommendation/s, finding/s and/or action/s for
record or referral purpose.

2.8

Where no settlement is reached by the parties, disciplinary or
administrative cases shall be referred by the OVPAA, OVPA
or OVPBC to the President for the purpose of creating and
constituting an investigation committee in accordance with
CSC rules or by referring the case/complaint to the Office of
the University Legal Counsel for appropriate action.

2.9

Sexual harassment cases shall be heard and decided pursuant
to the provisions of CSC Resolution No. 01-0940, dated May
21, 2001, and the same shall be handled by the Committee
on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) duly formed and
constituted by the University President.
TABLE OF SCHOLASTIC DELINQUENCY
AND ACTIONS TO BE TAKEN
RA 10931-UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO
QUALITY TERTIARY EDUCATION

1.

As stated in the Act, a student who has satisfied the admission
requirements shall be eligible to avail Free Education provided that
the student does not fall in the identified “ineligible” stated in Rule
II Section 6 “Exceptions to Free HE”.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

71

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

2.

For a student to enjoy continued Free Education benefits, he/she
must have good scholastic standing. However, in case of student’s
scholastic delinquency, the matrix below shows the action to be
taken (based on PUP Student Handbook).

Number of Subject
Failed/Withdrawn/
Dropped

Action to be Taken (for
24 units load in previous
semester)

Remarks

Warning

Warning*

1 subject
2 subjects

Load by 3 units

Warning*

3 subjects

Reduced load by 6 units

Scholarship will be
forfeited for the following semester (Paying)

4 subjects

Dismissal-dropped from the
University

-

Number of Subject
Failed/Withdrawn/
Dropped

Action to be Taken (for
21 units load in Previous
semester)

Remarks

1 subject

Warning

Warning*

2 subjects

72

Warning with reduced

Warning with reduced
Load by 3 units

Warning*

3 subjects

Reduced load by 6 units

Scholarship will be
forfeited for the following semester (Paying)

4 subjects

Dismissal-dropped from the
University

-

Number of Subject
Failed/Withdrawn/
Dropped

Action to be Taken (for
15-20 units load in Previous
semester)

Remarks

1-2 subjects

Warning

Warning*

3 subjects

Warning with reduced load by
3 units

Scholarship will be
forfeited for the following semester (Paying)

4 subjects

Dismissal-dropped from the
University

-

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

*Note: For students who acquired a “Warning” for two consecutive
semesters, their scholarship grant will be forfeited the following
semester.
3.

Existing admission, retention, and graduation rules and policy
of the University shall be upheld. It shall be used as a basis to
complement the implementation of the Act.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

73

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

APPENDIX 1
PUP POLICY AND GUIDELINES FOR STUDENTS
WITH DISABILITIES
Purpose
This policy aims to suffice the educational needs of students with disabilities,
mannered to comply with relevant anti-discrimination and accreditation
legislation, taking into account student learning needs while balancing the
interests of all parties affected.
Coverage
The policy applies to all students who are officially enrolled and verified with
medical disabilities.
Definitions
a. Disabled Persons are those suffering from restriction or different
abilities, as a result of a mental, physical or sensory impairment, to
perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered
normal for a human being;
b. Impairment is any loss, diminution or aberration of psychological,
physiological, or anatomical structure or function;
c. Disability - shall mean (1) a physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more psychological, physiological or
anatomical function of an individual or activities of such individual;
(2) a record of such an impairment; or (3) being regarded as having
such an impairment;
d. Handicap - refers to a disadvantage for a given individual resulting
from an impairment or a disability, that limits or prevents the
function or activity, that is considered normal given the age and
sex of the individual;
e. Social Barriers - refer to the characteristics of institutions, whether
legal, economic, cultural, recreational or other, any human group,
community, or society which limit the fullest possible participation
of disabled persons in the life of the group. Social barriers include
negative attitudes which tend to single out and exclude disabled
persons and which distort roles and inter-personal relationship;
f. Disabled Persons - are those suffering from restriction of different
abilities, as a result of a mental, physical or sensory impairment, to
perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered
normal for a human being
g. Learning Disability – is any disorder in one or more of the basic
psychological processes (perception, comprehension, thinking,

74

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

etc.) involved in the understanding or in using spoken or written
language.
h. Mental/Psychosocial Disability – is defined as any acquired
behavioral, cognitive, emotional or social impairment that limits one
or more activities necessary for effective interpersonal transactions
and other civilizing process or activities for daily living such as but
not limited to deviancy or anti-social behavior
i. Orthopedic Disability – is a disability in the normal functioning of
the joints, muscles and limbs.
j. Rehabilitation
- is an integrated approach to physical, social,
cultural, spiritual, educational and vocational measures that create
conditions for the individual to attain the highest possible level of
functional ability
k. Visual Disability – is one who has impairment of visual functioning
even after treatment and/or standard refractive correction, and has
visual acuity in the better eye of less than (6/18 for low vision and
3/60 for blind), or a visual of less than 10 degrees from the point
of fixation. A certain level of visual impairment is defined as legal
blindness. One is legally blind when your best corrected central
visual acuity in your better eye is 6/60 or worse or your side vision
is 20 degrees or less causing disability.
Policy Statement
The PUP community values diversity among students, recognizing
their rights to equitable access to learning. The school will assist the full
participation of students with disabilities by:
• Valuing students’ individualities, recognizing and responding to
their needs;
• Identifying the barriers that limit the students’ opportunities and
participation to different school activities;
• Providing appropriate level of resources to accommodate the
needs of students with disabilities;
• Consulting with the students, parents, and medical professionals
to make well-informed decisions about the programs to be enrolled
by the students with disability;
• For students who have been verified with disabilities, assign a
designated office which will assist in helping to meet the students
learning needs and who will also review periodically to discuss
their progress;
• Make reasonable adjustments for course work requirements like
homework deadlines, teaching methods, project submissions and
assessment procedures to meet the the needs of students with
disabilities;
• Providing physical environments that are conducive, accessible,

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

75

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

safe and welcoming;
• Respecting the rights of students with disabilities, with utmost
privacy and confidentiality;
• Formulate fair and transparent enrolment procedures for all
students, including those with disabilities;
• Foster a positive, informed and unprejudiced attitude among staff
and students towards people with disabilities; and
• Providing support and assistance to students with disabilities to
devise an adequate alternative educational arrangement when the
College is unable to meet their needs.
Processes
The university provides educational programs which cater for the individual
learning needs of students, where enrollment applications are received from
students with disabilities, the following processes will apply:
The university will take into account the individual support needs of the
applicant and the capacity for the university to provide an appropriate
educational program for the student. In particular, the university will assess
the level of special service or facilities and the learning support required
under the “Magna Carta for Disabled Persons (RA 7277)”
I.

Admission
Ensure that the enrollment process can be completed without
undue hardship so that a student with disability has opportunities
and choices in admission that are comparable with those offered to
a prospective student without disability.

II.

Support
Develop an environment that is welcoming and supportive of
students.
A.

B.

76

The Office of the Counseling and Psychological
Services (OCPS) acts as the arm in assisting students,
especially those with disabilities, in understanding their
psychological essentials, providing programs that meet
the needs of the students with disabilities which may
result to some form of assessment.
The Medical Services Office keeps up-to-date medical
profiles of students with disabilities, assisting whenever

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

C.

III.

necessary in terms of medical and dental services,
which includes an annual report of a list of students with
disabilities.
The Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs and
Services and Office of the Vice President for Academic
Affairs, closely monitor the holistic progress of students
with disabilities.

Access and Participation
Facilitate the accessibility of facilities and equipment, and the
participation of students with disabilities as full-fledged as possible
in the campus to create a whole school approach into meeting
the needs of all learners, delivering academic and non-academic
programs in a variety of ways that live out our commitment towards
inclusive education. Portray our shared belief that all students can
learn by ensuring that the program is engaging and challenging
for all students, and that students with disabilities are given equal
opportunity to demonstrate their skills and knowledge.
• Each student with a disability must be provided a
modified course program, like flexible delivery modes,
appropriate learning activities with the use of assistive
technology in circumstances in which they may not be
able to participate for an activity.
• Formulate programs that address the social and or
emotional needs of students who are in need of support.
• Accommodations are made appropriate to enable
participation of students with disabilities in co-curricular
activities such as sports and different cultural activities.

IV.

Discrimination-Free Culture
Live out the values proclaimed to affirm the importance of positive
relationships among everyone involved in a student’s learning.
Showcase conduct of behavior that promotes mutual respect, and
facilitate grievance process by ensuring expressions of concern
or complaints of discrimination and harassment are dealt with
promptly, sensitively and confidentially.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

77

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

BOARD OF REGENTS
School Year 2019-2020
Hon. RONALD L. ADAMAT, PhD, PD
Chairperson, PUP Board of Regents
Commissioner, Commission on Higher Education (CHED)
HEDC Bldg., C.P. Garcia Ave., UP Campus
Diliman, Quezon City
Hon. EMANUEL C. DE GUZMAN, PhD
Vice Chair, PUP Board of Regents
President, Polytechnic University of the Philippines
Hon. FRANCIS JOSEPH “CHIZ” G. ESCUDERO
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Senator, Senate of the Philippines
Rm. 510 & 5 (New Wing 5/F)
GSIS Bldg., Financial Center, Diokno Blvd., Pasay City
Represented by:
Atty. EDUARDO J. VALDEZ
Hon. PAOLO EVERARDO S. JAVIER
Member, PUP Board of Regents
District Representative, Antique
Chairperson, House Committee on Higher and Technical Education
Represented by:
Hon. CELIA CAPADOCIA - YANGCO
Former Acting Secretary & Undersecretary
Department of Social Welfare & Development, Philippines
Hon. ERNESTO M. PERNIA
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Director General
National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA)
12th St., J. Escriva Drive, Ortigas Center, Pasig City
Represented by:
Hon. ROWEENA M. DALUSONG
Director IV, NEDA

78

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

Hon. JOSE B. PATALINJUG III
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Regional Director
Department of Science and Technology – National Capital Region
DOST-NCR Building, DOST Compound
Gen. Santos Ave., Bicutan, Taguig City
Hon. DANILO L. BELO
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Private Sector Representative
Loans Product Management Officer – Wholesale Banking Segment Senior Assistant
Vice President
4/F Security Bank Center, 6776 Ayala Ave., Makati City 0719
Hon. ANTONIO C. MONCUPA JR.
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Private Sector Representative
Vice Chair/CEO, EastWest Bank
EastWest Bank Corporate Center, 5/F The Beaufort,
5th Avenue corner 23rd St. Bonifacio Global City, Taguig 1634
Hon. JERRILYNN L. PILAR
Member, PUP Board of Regents
Department Manager III, Pag-IBIG Fund (HDMF)
409 Shaw Boulevard, Mandaluyong City
PUP Alumni Representative
President, Federation of Alumni Association in PUP, Inc.
Hon. EDNA S. LAVADIA
Member, PUP Board of Regents
President, Federated Faculty Association, Inc.
Hon. RONILO G. CERVANTES JR.
Member, PUP Board of Regents
PUP Students Representative - President, ANAK PUP

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

79

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

UNIVERSITY OFFICIALS
School Year 2019-2020
Emanuel C. De Guzman, PhD
President
Alberto C. Guillo, MS (Stat) MA (Econ)
Executive Vice President
Manuel M. Muhi, D.Tech.
Vice President for Academic Affairs
Zenaida R. Sarmiento, DEM
Vice President for Student Affairs and Services
Anna Ruby P. Gapasin, DEM
Vice President for Research, Extension and Development
Adam V. Ramilo, MIR
Vice President for Administration
Marisa J. Legaspi, CPA
Vice President for Finance
Pascualito B. Gatan, MBA
Vice President for Satellite Branches and Campuses

80

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

COMMITTEE ON
STUDENT HANDBOOK REVISION
ZENAIDA R. SARMIENTO
Vice President for Student Affairs and Services
Chair
MANUEL M. MUHI
Vice President for Academic Affairs
Co-Chair
EDNA S. LAVADIA
President, PUP Federated Faculty Association, Inc.
PUP Faculty Representative
Member
JERRILYNN L. PILAR
President, Federation of Alumni Association in PUP, Inc.
PUP Alumni Representative
Member
RONILO G. CERVANTES, JR.
President, ANAK-PUP Student Councils Federation
PUP Students Representative
Member
JOANNA MARIE A. LIAO
University Legal Officer
Member
ROLANDO M. COVERO JR.
University/Board Secretary
Member
NORBERTO V. CATURAY
Assistant to the Vice President for Satellite
Branches and Campuses
Member

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

81

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

JOSE M. ABAT
Director, Office of the Student Services
Member
FLORDELIZA E. ALVENDIA
University Registrar
Member
BARBARA P. CAMACHO
Director, Office of the Counseling
and Psychological Services
Member
FLORINDA H. OQUINDO
JOHN MARK N. NERO
Secretariat
EDELYN M. MARIANO
ANGELINA E. BORICAN
CHRISTINE A. DEL ROSARIO
Editors

82

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

PU P ST U D EN T H AN D BO O K

POSTLUDE
It is hoped that every PUP student will take full advantage of the opportunities
the University offers, and assume responsibility for developing himself to
the fullest during his/her studies, so that eventually he/she will be able to
contribute to the building of a truly prosperous, independent, and sovereign
Philippines. May each Iskolar ng Bayan relentlessly search for and defend
the truth; acquire moral and spiritual values; become more conscious of
our rich cultural heritage; develop self-discipline, nationalism, and social
consciousness; realize the need to defend human rights; become liberally
educated to understand and appreciate life more broadly; become conscious
of the country’s technological, social, and politico-economic development;
and use, as well as propagate, the national language and other Philippine
languages without neglecting to develop proficiency in English and other
foreign languages required by his/her own field of specialization.

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

83

P U P ST U D EN T H AND B OO K

84

The Country ’s 1ST PolytechnicU

